Source: J. B. Lightfoot and J. R. Harmer, The Apostolic Fathers: revised texts with short introductions and English translations. London: Macmillan, 1891, pages 76-85: the translation of the Epistle of S. Clement to the Corinthians, chapters 44 to 65.
Public domain by age. Scanned by the Internet Archive; archive.org/details/apostolicfathers00ligh

Lightfoot's English of a text that had six chapters the Ante-Nicene Fathers could not print. The 1885 printing follows Codex Alexandrinus, whose last leaf is damaged: everything from 57.7 to 63.4 is gone with it, and the great intercessory prayer is inside that hole. Bryennios found the gap filled in a Constantinople manuscript in 1873, and Lightfoot prints the whole letter. Ten leaves are taken rather than the four the missing chapters occupy: the running head has to repeat before it can be recognised as one, and the leaves on either side are what let tools/build_lightfoot.py check that the chapters it cuts out sit where the volume already has 57 and 64.

Recovered from the scan's word coordinates by tools/scans.py, run from tools/fetch_scans.py: the running heads, the marginal line-numbers and the footnotes are taken off by where they sit on the leaf. Each [page n] below is the scan's own image number, so any line here can be put beside the leaf it came from. Lines are the printed lines. A blank line means a paragraph opens on the line after it; the page markers carry no blank line of their own, so that a paragraph broken by a page turn stays one paragraph.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[page 91]

44. And our Apostles knew through our Lord Jesus Christ that
there would be strife over the name of the bishop’s office. For this
cause therefore, having received complete foreknowledge, they ap-
pointed the aforesaid persons, and afterwards they provided a con-
tinuance, that if these should fall asleep, other approved men should
succeed to their ministration. ‘Those therefore who were appointed by
them, or afterward by other men of repute with the consent of the
whole Church, and have ministered unblameably to the flock of Christ
in lowliness of mind, peacefully and with all modesty, and for long
time have borne a good report with all—these men we consider to be
unjustly thrust out from their ministration. For it will be no light sin
for us, if we thrust out those who have offered the gifts of the bishop’s
office unblameably and holily. Blessed are those presbyters who have
gone before, seeing that their departure was fruitful and ripe: for they
have no fear lest any one should remove them from their appointed
place. For we see that ye have displaced certain persons, though they
were living honourably, from the ministration which thad been re-
spected by themt blamelessly.

45. Be ye contentious, brethren, and jealous about the things that
pertain unto salvation. Ye have searched the scriptures, which are
true, which were given through the Holy Ghost; and ye know that
nothing unrighteous or counterfeit is written in them. Ye will not find
that righteous persons have been thrust out by holy men. Righteous
men were persecuted, but it was by the lawless; they were imprisoned,
but it was by the unholy. ‘They were stoned by transgressors: they
were slain by those who had conceived a detestable and unrighteous
jealousy. Suffering these things, they endured nobly. For what must
we say, brethren? Was Daniel cast into the lions’ den by them that
feared God? Or were Ananias and Azarias and Misael shut up in the
furnace of fire by them that professed the excellent and glorious worship
of the Most High? Far be this from our thoughts. Who then were
they that did these things? Abominable men and full of all wickedness
were stirred up to such a pitch of wrath, as to bring cruel suffering
upon them that served God in a holy and blameless purpose, not
knowing that the Most High is the champion and protector of them
that in a pure conscience serve His excellent Name: unto whom be
the glory for ever and ever. Amen. But they that endured patiently in
confidence inherited glory and honour; they were exalted, and had their
names recorded by God in their memorial for ever and ever. Amen.
[page 92]
46. To such examples as these therefore, brethren, we also ought
to cleave. For it is written; Cleave unto the saints, for they that cleave
unto them shall be sanctified. And again He saith in another place;
With the guiltless man thou shalt be guiltless, and with the elect thou
shalt be elect, and with the crooked thou shalt deal crookedly. Let us
therefore cleave to the guiltless and righteous: and these are the elect
of God. Wherefore are there strifes and wraths and factions and
divisions and war among you? Have we not one God and one Christ
and one Spirit of grace that was shed upon us? And is there not one
calling in Christ? Wherefore do we tear and rend asunder the members
of Christ, and stir up factions against our own body, and reach such a
pitch of folly, as to forget that we are members one of another? Re-
member the words of Jesus our Lord: for He said, Woe unto that man;
it were good for him if he had not been born, rather than that he should
offend one of Mine elect. It were better for him that a mill-stone were
hanged about him, and he cast into the sea, than that he should pervert
one of Mine elect. Your division hath perverted many; it hath brought
many to despair, many to doubting, and all of us to sorrow. And your
sedition still continueth.

47. Take up the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle. What
wrote he first unto you in the beginning of the Gospel? Of a truth he
charged you in the Spirit concerning himself and Cephas and Apollos,
because that even then ye had made parties. Yet that making of
parties brought less sin upon you; for ye were partisans of Apostles
that were highly reputed, and of a man approved in their sight. But
now mark ye, who they are that have perverted you and diminished the
glory of your renowned love for the brotherhood. It is shameful,
dearly beloved, yes, utterly shameful and unworthy of your conduct in
Christ, that it should be reported that the very stedfast and ancient
Church of the Corinthians, for the sake of one or two persons, maketh
sedition against its presbyters. And this report hath reached not only
us, but them also which differ from us, so that ye even heap blasphemies
on the Name of the Lord by reason of your folly, and moreover create
peril for yourselves.

48. Let us therefore root this out quickly, and let us fall down
before the Master and entreat Him with tears, that He may show Him-
self propitious and be reconciled unto us, and may restore us to the
seemly and pure conduct which belongeth to our love of the brethren.
For this is a gate of righteousness opened unto life, as it is written;
[page 93]
Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may enter in thereby and pratse
the Lord. This ts the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter in
thereby. Seeing then that many gates are opened, this is that gate
which is in righteousness, even that which is in Christ, whereby all are
blessed that have entered in and direct their path in holiness and
righteousness, performing all things without confusion. Let a man be
faithful, let him be able to expound a deep saying, let him be wise in
the discernment of words, let him be strenuous in deeds, let him be
pure; for so much the more ought he to be lowly in mind, in pro-
portion as he seemeth to be the greater; and he ought to seek the
common advantage of all, and not his own.

49. Let him that hath love in Christ fulfil the commandments of
Christ. Who can declare the bond of the love of God? Who is
sufficient to tell the majesty of its beauty? The height, whereunto love
exalteth, is unspeakable. Love joineth us unto God; Jove covereth a
multitude of sins ; love endureth all things, is long-suffering in all things.
There is nothing coarse, nothing arrogant in love. Love hath no di-
visions, love maketh no seditions, love doeth all things in concord. In
love were all the elect of God made perfect ; without love nothing is
well-pleasing to God: in love the Master took us unto Himself; for the
love which He had toward us, Jesus Christ our Lord hath given His
blood for us by the will of God, and His flesh for our flesh and His life
for our lives.

50. Ye see, dearly beloved, how great and marvellous a thing is
love, and there is no declaring its perfection. Who is sufficient to be
found therein, save those to whom God shall vouchsafe it? Let us
therefore entreat and ask of His mercy, that we may be found blameless
in love, standing apart from the factiousness of men. All the gene-
rations from Adam unto this day have passed away: but they that by
God’s grace were perfected in love dwell in the abode of the pious; and
they shall be made manifest in the visitation of the Kingdom of God.
For it is written; Luter into the closet for a very little while, until Mine
anger and My wrath shall pass away, and I will remember a good day
and will raise you from your tombs. Blessed were we, dearly beloved,
if we should be doing the commandments of God in concord of love, to
the end that our sins may through love be forgiven us. For it is
written ; Blessed are they whose iniguities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. Blessed ts the man to whom the Lord shall impute no sin, neither
zs gutle in his mouth. This declaration of blessedness was pronounced
[page 94]
upon them that have been elected by God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

51. For all our transgressions which we have committed through
any of the wiles of the adversary, let us entreat that we may obtain
forgiveness. Yea and they also, who set themselves up as leaders of
faction and division, ought to look to the common ground of hope.
For such as walk in fear and love desire that they themselves should
fall into suffering rather than their neighbours; and they pronounce
condemnation against themselves rather than against the harmony
which hath been handed down to us nobly and nghteously. For it is
good for a man to make confession of his trespasses rather than to
harden his heart, as the heart of those was hardened who made
sedition against Moses the servant of God; whose condemnation was
clearly manifest, for they went down to hades alive, and Death shall be
their shepherd. Pharaoh and his host and all the rulers of Egypt, their
chartots and their horsemen, were overwhelmed in the depths of the Red
Sea, and perished for none other reason but because their foolish hearts
were hardened after that the signs and the wonders had been wrought
in the land of Egypt by the hand of Moses the servant of God.

52. The Master, brethren, hath need of nothing at all. He
desireth not anything of any man, save to confess unto Him. For the
elect David saith; 7 w#l/ confess unto the Lord, and it shall please Him
more than a young calf that groweth horns and hoofs. Let the poor see tt,
and rejoice. And again He saith; Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise,
and pay thy vows to the Most High: and call upon Me in the day of thine
affiction, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me. For a
sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit.

53. For ye know, and know well, the sacred scriptures, dearly
beloved, and ye have searched into the oracles of God. We write these
things therefore to put you in remembrance. When Moses went up
into the mountain and had spent forty days and forty nights in fasting
and humiliation, God said unto him; JZoses, Moses, come down quickly
hence, for My people whom thou leddest forth from the land of Egypt have
wrought iniguity: they have transgressed quickly out of the way which
thou didst command unto them; they have made for themselves molten
images. And the Lord said unto him; I have spoken unto thee once and
twice, saying, I have seen this people, and behold tt ts stiff-necked. Let Me
destroy them utterly, and I will blot out their name from under heaven,
and I will make of thee a nation great and wonderful and numerous more
[page 95]
than this. And Moses said; (Vay, not so, Lord. Forgive this people
their sin, or blot me also out of the book of the living. O mighty love! O
unsurpassable perfection! ‘The servant is bold with his Master; he
asketh forgiveness for the multitude, or he demandeth that himself also
be blotted out with them.

54. Who therefore is noble among you? Who is compassionate?
I do that which is ordered by the people: only let the flock of Christ
be at peace with its duly appointed presbyters. He that shall have
done this, shall win for himself great renown in Christ, and every place
will receive him: for the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.
Thus have they done and will do, that live as citizens of that kingdom
of God which bringeth no regrets.

55. But, to bring forward examples of Gentiles also; many kings
and rulers, when some season of pestilence pressed upon them, being
taught by oracles have delivered themselves over to death, that they
might rescue their fellow citizens through their own blood. Many have
retired from their own cities, that they might have no more seditions. -
We know that many among ourselves have delivered themselves to
bondage, that they might ransom others. Many have sold themselves
to slavery, and receiving the price paid for themselves have fed others.
Many women being strengthened through the grace of God have
performed many manly deeds. The blessed Judith, when the city
was beleaguered, asked of the elders that she might be suffered to go
forth into the camp of the aliens. So she exposed herself to peril and
went forth for love of her country and of her people which were
beleaguered ; and the Lord delivered Holophernes into the hand of a
woman. To no less peril did Esther also, who was perfect in faith,
expose herself, that she might deliver the twelve tribes of Israel, when
they were on the point to perish. For through her fasting and her
humiliation she entreated the all-seeing Master, the God of the ages ;
and He, seeing the humility of her soul, delivered the people for whose
sake she encountered the peril.

56. Therefore let us also make intercession for them that are in
any transgression, that forbearance and humility may be given them, to
the end that they may yield not unto us, but unto the will of God. For
so shall the compassionate remembrance of them with God and the
saints be fruitful unto them, and perfect. Let us accept chastisement,
[page 96]
whereat no man ought to be vexed, dearly beloved. ‘The admonition
which we give one to another is good and exceeding useful; for it
joineth us unto the will of God. For thus saith the holy word; Ze
Lord hath indeed chastened me, and hath not delivered me over unto death.
For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom
He receiveth. For the righteous, it 1s said, shall chasten me in mercy and
shall reprove me, but let not the + mercyt of sinners anoint my head. And
again He saith; Blessed is the man whom the Lord hath reproved, and
refuse not thou the admonition of the Almighty. For He causeth pain,
and He restoreth again: He hath smitten, and His hands have healed.
Six times shall He rescue thee from affiictions: and at the seventh no evil
shall touch thee. In famine He shall deliver thee from death, and in war
Fe shall release thee from the arm of the sword. And from the scourge of
the tongue shall He hide thee, and thou shalt not be afratd when evils
approach. Thou shalt laugh at the unrighteous and wicked, and of the
wild beasts thou shalt not be afraid. For wild beasts shall be at peace
with thee. Then shalt thou know that thy house shall be at peace: and
the abode of thy tabernacle shall not go wrong, and thou shalt know that
thy seed ts many, and thy children as the plenteous herbage of the field.
And thou shalt come to the grave as ripe corn reaped in due season, or as
the heap of the threshing floor gathered together at the right time. Ye see,
dearly beloved, how great protection there is for them that are chastened
by the Master: for being a kind father He chasteneth us to the end
that we may obtain mercy through His holy chastisement.

57. Ye therefore that laid the foundation of the sedition, submit
yourselves unto the presbyters and receive chastisement unto repentance,
bending the knees of your heart. Learn to submit yourselves, laying
aside the arrogant and proud stubbornness of your tongue. For it is
better for you to be found little in the flock of Christ and to have your ©
name on God’s roll, than to be had in exceeding honour and yet be
cast out from the hope of Him. For thus saith the All-virtuous
Wisdom ; Behold I will pour out for you a saying of My breath, and I
will teach you My word. Because I called and ye obeyed not, and I held
out words and ye heeded not, but made My counsels of none effect, and were
disobedient unto My reproofs; therefore I also will laugh at your
destruction, and will rejoice over you when ruin cometh upon you, and
when confusion overtaketh you suddenly, and your overthrow is at hand
like a whirlwind, or when anguish and beleaguerment come upon you.
Lor it shall be, when ye call upon Me, yet will I not hear you. Evil men
[page 97]
shall seek Me and shall not find Me: for they hated wisdom, and chose
not the fear of the Lord, neither would they give heed unto My counsels,
but mocked at My reproofs. Therefore they shall eat the fruits of their
own way, and shall be filled with their own ungodliness. For because they
wronged babes, they shall be slain, and inquisition shall destroy the ungodly.
But he that heareth Me shall dwell safely trusting in hope, and shall be
quiet from fear of all evil.

58. Let us therefore be obedient unto His most holy and glorious
Name, thereby escaping the threatenings which were spoken of old by
the mouth of Wisdom against them which disobey, that we may dwell
safely, trusting in the most holy Name of His majesty. Receive our
counsel, and ye shall have no occasion of regret. For as God liveth,
and the Lord Jesus Christ liveth, and the Holy Spirit, who are the faith
and the hope of the elect, so surely shall he, who with lowliness of mind
and instant in gentleness hath without regretfulness performed the
ordinances and commandments that are given by God, be enrolled and
have a name among the number of them that are saved through Jesus
Christ, through whom is the glory unto Him for ever and ever. Amen.
59. But if certain persons should be disobedient unto the words
spoken by Him through us, let them understand that they will entangle
themselves in no slight transgression and danger; but we shall be
guiltless of this sin. And we will ask, with instancy of prayer and
supplication, that the Creator of the universe may guard intact unto
the end the number that hath been numbered of His elect throughout
the whole world, through His beloved Son Jesus Christ, through whom
He called us from darkness to light, from ignorance to the full know-
ledge of the glory of His Name.

[Grant unto us, Lord,]that we may set our hope on Thy Name which
is the primal source of all creation, and open the eyes of our hearts,
that we may know Thee, who alone adidest Highest in the lofty, Holy
in the holy; who layest low the insolence of the proud, who scatterest the
imaginings of nations; who settest the lowly on high, and bringest the
lofty low; who makest rich and makest poor; who killest and makest
alive ; whoralone art the Benefactor of spirits and the God of all flesh ;
who Jlookest into the abysses, who scannest the works of man; the
Succour of them that are in peril, the Saviour of them that are in
despair; the Creator and Overseer of every spirit; who multipliest the
nations upon earth, and hast chosen out from all men those that love
Thee through Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, through whom Thou didst
[page 98]
instruct us, didst sanctify us, didst honour us. We beseech Thee, Lord
and Master, to be our help and succour. Save those among us who
are in tribulation; have mercy on the lowly; lift up the fallen; show
Thyself unto the needy; heal the ungodly; convert the wanderers of
Thy people; feed the hungry; release our prisoners; raise up the
weak ; comfort the faint-hearted. ef all the Gentiles know that Thou
art God alone, and Jesus Christ is Thy Son, and we ave Thy people and
the sheep of Thy pasture.

60. Thou through Thine operations didst make manifest the ever-
lasting fabric of the world. Thou, Lord, didst create the earth. Thou
that art faithful throughout all generations, righteous in Thy judgments,
marvellous in strength and excellence, Thou that art wise in creating
and prudent in establishing that which Thou hast made, that art good
in the things which are seen and faithful with them that trust on Thee,
pitiful and compassionate, forgive us our iniquities and our unrighteous-
nesses and our transgressions and shortcomings. Lay not to our account
every sin of Thy servants and Thine handmaids, but cleanse us with
the cleansing of Thy truth, and guzde our steps to walk in holiness and
righteousness and singleness of heart and ¢o do such things as are good
and well-pleasing in Thy sight and in the sight of our rulers. Yea,
Lord, make Thy face to shine upon us in peace for our good, that we
may be sheltered 4y Zhy mighty hand and delivered from every sin dy
Thine uplifted arm. And deliver us from them that hate us wrongfully.
Give concord and peace to us and to all that dwell on the earth, as
Thou gavest to our fathers, when they called on Thee in faith and truth
with holiness, [that we may be saved,] while we render obedience to
Thine almighty and most excellent Name, and to our rulers and governors
upon the earth.

61. Thou, Lord and Master, hast given them the power of sovereignty
through Thine excellent and unspeakable might, that we knowing the
glory and honour which Thou hast given them may submit ourselves
unto them, in nothing resisting Thy will. Grant unto them therefore,
O Lord, health, peace, concord, stability, that they may administer the
government which Thou hast given them without failure. For Thou, O
heavenly Master, King of the ages, givest to the sons of men glory and
honour and power over all things that are upon the earth. Do Thou,
Lord, direct their counsel according to that which is good and well-
pleasing in Thy sight, that, administering in peace and gentleness with
godliness the power which Thou hast given them, they may obtain Thy
6—2
[page 99]
favour. O Thou, who alone art able to do these things and things far
more exceeding good than these for us, we praise Thee through the
High-priest and Guardian of our souls, Jesus Christ, through whom
be the glory and the majesty unto Thee both now and for all genera-
tions and for ever and ever. Amen.

62. As touching those things which befit our religion and are most
useful for a virtuous life to such as would guide [their steps]in holiness
and righteousness, we have written fully unto you, brethren. For con-
cerning faith and repentance and genuine love and temperance and
sobriety and patience we have handled every argument, putting you in
remembrance, that ye ought to please Almighty God in righteousness
and truth and long-suffering with holiness, laying aside malice and pur-
suing concord in love and peace, being instant in gentleness; even as
our fathers, of whom we spake before, pleased Him, being lowly-
minded towards their Father and God and Creator and towards all
men. And we have put you in mind of these things the more gladly,
since we knew well that we were writing to men who are faithful and
highly accounted and have diligently searched into the oracles of the
teaching of God.

63. Therefore it is right for us to give heed to so great and so
many examples and to submit the neck and occupying the place of
obedience to take our side with them that are the leaders of our souls,
that ceasing from this foolish dissension we may attain unto the goal
which lieth before us in truthfulness, keeping aloof from every fault.
For ye will give us great joy and gladness, if ye render obedience unto
the things written by us through the Holy Spirit, and root out the un-
righteous anger of your jealousy, according to the entreaty which we
have made for peace and concord in this letter. And we have also
sent faithful and prudent men that have walked among us from youth
unto old age unblameably, who shall also be witnesses between you
and us. And this we have done that ye might know that we have
had, and still have, every solicitude that ye should be speedily at
peace.

64. Finally may the All-seeing God and Master of spirits and Lord
of all flesh, who chose the Lord Jesus Christ, and us through Him for a
peculiar people, grant unto every soul that is called after His excellent
and holy Name faith, fear, peace, patience, long-suffering, temperance,
chastity and soberness, that they may be well-pleasing unto His Name
through our High-priest and Guardian Jesus Christ, through whom
[page 100]
unto Him be glory and majesty, might and honour, both now and for
ever and ever. Amen.

65. Nowsend ye back speedily unto us our messengers Claudius
Ephebus and Valerius Bito, together with Fortunatus also, in peace
and with joy, to the end that they may the more quickly report the
peace and concord which is prayed for and earnestly desired by us,
that we also may the more speedily rejoice over your good order.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you and with all men
in all places who have been called by God and through Him, through
whom be glory and honour, power and greatness and eternal dominion,
unto Him, from the ages past and for ever and ever. Amen.
