Source: Montague Rhodes James, The Apocryphal New Testament. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924, pages 505-520: the Ethiopic text of the Apocalypse of Peter.
Public domain by age. Scanned by the Internet Archive; archive.org/details/JAMESApocryphalNewTestament1924

The Apocalypse of Peter as it stands inside the Ethiopic Books of Clement — Qalementos — in James's English of Grébaut's Ethiopic. James prints his own study of the book, then the Greek fragment, then this; tools/build_ethiopian.py cuts the other two off. The cross-references to the Greek are set as hanging labels and are his.

Recovered from the scan's word coordinates by tools/scans.py, run from tools/fetch_scans.py: the running heads, the marginal line-numbers and the footnotes are taken off by where they sit on the leaf. Each [page n] below is the scan's own image number, so any line here can be put beside the leaf it came from. Lines are the printed lines. A blank line means a paragraph opens on the line after it; the page markers carry no blank line of their own, so that a paragraph broken by a page turn stays one paragraph.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[page 531]
and, as I think, the Shepherd of Hermas: as well as in the Apocalypse
of Paul, and many later visions.

The length of the book is given in the Stichometry of Nicephorus as
800 lines and in that of the Codex Claromontanus (D of the Epistles)
as 270 : the latter is a Latin list of the Biblical books ; already cited
for the Acts of Paul.

There is no mention of it in the Gelasian Decree, which is curious.
At one time it was popular in Rome, for the Muratorian Canon mentions
it (late in the second century?) along with the Apocalypse of John,
though it adds, that 4 some will not have it read in the church The
fifth-century church historian Sozomen (vii. 19) says that to his know¬
ledge it was still read annually in some churches in Palestine on Good
Friday.

A translation of the ancient quotations shall be given first.

A

1. From Clement of Alexandria’s so-called Prophetical Extracts,
a series of detached sentences excerpted from some larger work,
generally supposed to be his Hypotyposes or Outlines :

a. (41. 1) The Scripture saith that the children which have
been exposed (by their parents) are delivered to a care-taking
angel by whom they are educated, and made to grow up; and
they shall be, it saith, as the faithful of an hundred years old
are here (in this life), b. (41.2) Wherefore also Peter in the
Apocalypse saith: And a flash (lightning) of fire leaping from
those children and smiting the eyes of the women.

2. Ibid. (48. l)The providence of God doth not light upon them
only that are in the flesh. For example, Peter in the Apocalypse
saith that the children born out of due time (abortively) that
would have been of the better part (i. e. would have been saved if
they had lived)—these are delivered to a care-taking angel,
that they may partake of knowledge and obtain the better
abode, having suffered what they would have suffered had
they been in the body. But the others (i. e. those who would
not have been saved, had they lived) shall only obtain salvation,
as beings that have been injured and had mercy shown to them,
and shall continue without torment, receiving that as a reward.
But the milk of the mothers, flowing from their breasts and
Congealing, saith Peter in the Apocalypse, shall engender small
beasts (snakes) devouring the flesh, and these running upon
them devour them: teaching that the torments come to pass
because of the sins (correspond to the sins).

3. From the Symposium (ii. 6) of Methodius of Olympus
(third century). He does not name his source : Whence also
we have received in inspired writings that children born untimely
—even if they be the offspring of adultery—are delivered to
care-taking angels. For if they nad come into being contrary to
the will and ordinance of that blessed nature of God, how could
they have been delivered to angels to be nourished up in all repose
[page 532]
and tranquillity? And how could they have confidently sum¬
moned their parents before the judgement seat of Christ to accuse
them ? saying : Thou, O Lord, didst not begrudge us this light
that is common to all, but these exposed us to death, contemmng
thy commandment.

The word rendered care-taking in these passages is a very rare one—
rrjuekovxos, temelouchos : so rare that it was mistaken by later readers
for the proper name of an angel, and we find an angel Temeluchus in
Paul , John , and elsewhere. A similar case is that of the word raprapoOxos,
Tartaruchus, keeper of hell, which is applied to angels in our Apoca¬
lypse, and is also taken in the Ethiopic version, in Paul , and in other
writings, to be a proper name.

4. From the Apocritica of Macarius Magnes (fourth century)
of whom we know little. His book consists of extracts from
a heathen opponent’s attack on Christianity (Porphyry and
Hierocles are named as possible authors of it) and his own
answers. The heathen writer says (iv. 6, 7):

And by way of superfluity let this also be cited which is said
in the Apocalypse of Peter. He introduces the heaven, to be
judged along with the earth, thus: The earth, he says, shall
present all men to God to be judged in the day of judgement,
being itself also to be judged along with the heaven that encom-
passeth it.

5. Ibid. And this again he says, which is a statement full
of impiety: And every power of heaven shall be melted, and the
heaven shall be rolled up like a book, and all the stars shall
fall like leaves from the vine, and as the leaves from the fig-tree.
This very nearly coincides with Isa. xxxiv. 4, and does not occur in
our other texts of the Apocalypse.

6. In an old Latin homily on the Ten Virgins found and pub¬
lished by Dom Wilmart (Bulletin (Pane. litt. et Par Mol. chrit.)
is this sentence:

The closed door is the river of fire by which the ungodly shall
be kept out of the kingdom of God, as is written in Daniel and
in Peter, in his Apocalypse. . . . That company of the foolish
also shall arise and find the door shut, that is, the fiery river
set against them.

The equivalent of all the above quotations is found in the Ethiopic
text, with one exception, no. 6. The Akhmim text only contains
something like no. 1 b : one indication out of many that it is a
shortened and, I would say, secondary text.

B

THE AKHMIM FRAGMENT
which I should prefer to call Fragment II of the Gospel of
Peter. It begins abruptly in a discourse of our Lord.

1 Many of them shall be false prophets, and shall teach ways
[page 533]
and diverse doctrines of perdition. 2 And they shall become
sons of of perdition. 3 And then shall God come unto my faith¬
ful ones that hunger and thirst and are afflicted and prove their
souls in this life, and shall judge the sons of iniquity.

4 And the Lord added and said: Let us go unto the mountain
(and) pray. 5 And going with him, we the twelve disciples
besought him that he would show us one of our righteous
brethren that had departed out of the world, that we might
see what manner of men they are in their form, and take courage,
and encourage also the men that should hear us.

6 And as we prayed, suddenly there appeared two men stand¬
ing before the Lord (perhaps add , to the east) upon whom we
were not able to look. 7 For there issued from their countenance
a ray as of the sun, and their raiment was shining so as the eye
of man never saw the like: for no mouth is able to declare nor
heart to conceive the glory wherewith they were clad and the
beauty of their countenance. 8 Whom when we saw we were
astonied, for their bodies were whiter than any snow and redder
than any rose. 9 And the redness of them was mingled with
the whiteness, and, in a word, I am not able to declare their
beauty. 10 For their hair was curling and flourishing (flowery),
and fell comely about their countenance and their shoulders
like a garland woven of nard and various flowers, or like a rain¬
bow in the air: such was their comeliness.

11 We, then, seeing the beauty of them were astonied at them,
for they appeared suddenly. 12 And I drew near to the Lord
and said: Who are these? 18 He saith to me: These are your
(ourl righteous brethren whose appearance ye did desire to see.
14 And I said unto him: And where are all the righteous?
or of what sort is the world wherein they are, and possess this
glory? 15 And the Lord showed me a very great region outside
this world exceeding bright with light, and the air of that place
illuminated with the beams of the sun, and the earth of itself
flowering with blossoms that fade not, and full of spices and
plants, fair-flowering and incorruptible, and bearing blessed fruit.
16 And so great was the blossom that the odour thereof was
borne thence even unto us.

17 And the dwellers in that place were clad with the raiment
of shining angels, and their raiment was like unto their land.
18 And angels ran round about them there. 19 And the glory
of them that dwelt there was all equal, and with one voice they
praised the Lord God, rejoicing in that place.

20 The Lord saith unto us: This is the place of your leaders
(or, high priests), the righteous men.

21 And I saw also another place over against that one, very
squalid; and it was a place of punishment, and they that were
punished and the angels that punished them had their raiment
dark, according to the air of the place.
[page 534]

22 And some there were there hanging by their tongues;
and these were they that blasphemed the way of righteousness,
and under them was laid fire flaming and tormenting them.

23 And there was a great lake full of flaming mire, wherein
were certain men that turned away from righteousness; and
angels, tormentors, were set over them.

24 And there were also others, women, hanged by their hair
above that mire which boiled up; and these were they that
adorned themselves for adultery.

And the men that were joined with them in the defilement
of adultery were hanging by their feet, and had their heads
hidden in the mire, and said: We believed not that we should
come unto this place.

25 And I saw the murderers and them that were consenting
to them cast into a strait place full of evil, creeping things, and
smitten by those beasts, and so turning themselves about in
that torment. And upon them were set worms like clouds of
darkness. And the souls of them that were murdered stood
and looked upon the torment of those murderers and said:
O God, righteous is thy judgement.

26 And hard by that place I saw another strait place wherein
the discharge and the stench of them that were in torment ran
down, and there was as it were a lake there. And there sat
women up to their necks in that liquor, and over against them
many children which were born out of due time sat crying : and
from them went forth rays of fire and smote the women in the
eyes : and these were they that conceived out of wedlock (?) and
caused abortion.

27 And other men and women were being burned up to their
middle and cast down in a dark place and scourged by evil
spirits, and having their entrails devoured by worms that rested
not. And these were they that had persecuted the righteous
and delivered them up.

28 And near to them again were women and men gnawing
their lips and in torment, and having iron heated in the fire set
against their eyes. And these were they that did blaspheme
and speak evil of the way of righteousness.

29 And over against these were yet others, men and women,
gnawing their tongues and having flaming fire in their mouths.
And these were the false witnesses.

30 And in another place were gravel-stones sharper than
swords or any spit, heated with fire, and men and women clad
in filthy rags rolled upon them in torment. 1 And these were
they that were rich and trusted in their riches, and had no pity
upon orphans and widows but neglected the commandments of God.
[page 535]

81 And in another great lake full of foul matter (pus) and
blood and boiling mire stood men and women up to their knees.
And these were they that lent money and demanded usury upon
usury.

32 And other men and women being cast down from a great
rock (precipice) fell (came) to the bottom, and again were driven
by them that were set over them, to go up upon the rock, and
thence were cast down to the bottom and had no rest from this
torment. And these were they that did defile their bodies,
behaving as women: and the women that were with them were
they that lay with one another as a man with a woman.

33 And beside that rock was a place full of much fire, and
there stood men which with their own hands had made images
for themselves instead of God, [And beside them other men and
women] 1 having rods of fire and smiting one another and never
resting from this manner of torment. . . .

34 And yet others near unto them, men and women, burning
and turning themselves about and roasted as in a pan. And these
were they that forsook the way of God.

C

THE BODLEIAN LEAF

It measures but 2J by 2 inches and has 13 lines of 8 to 10
letters on each side (Madan’s Summary Catalogue , No. 31810).
The verso (second page) is difficult to read.

Recto = Gr. 33, 34: women holding chains and scourging them¬
selves before those idols of deceit. And they shall unceasingly
have this torment. And near

Verso : them shall be other men and women burning in the
burning of them that were mad after idols. And these are they
which forsook the way of God wholly (?) and . . .

D

THE ETHIOPIC TEXT

First published by the Abbe Sylvain Gr6baut in Revue de
VOrient Chretien , 1910 : a fresh translation from his Ethiopic
text by H. Duensing appeared in Zeitschr.f. ntl, Wiss ., 1913.

The Second Coming of Christ and Resurrection of the Dead
(which Christ revealed unto Peter) who died because of their
sins, for that they kept not the commandment of God their
creator.

And he (Peter) pondered thereon, that he might perceive the
mystery of the Son of God, the merciful and lover of mercy.

And when the Lord was seated upon the Mount of Olives, his
disciples came unto him.
[page 536]

And we besought and entreated him severally and prayed
him, saying unto him: Declare unto us what are the signs of
thy coming and of the end of the world, that we may perceive
and mark the time of thy coming and instruct them that come
after us, unto whom we preach the word of thy gospel, and whom
we set over (in) thy church, that they when they hear it may
take heed to themselves and mark the time of thy coming.

And our Lord answered us, saying: Take heed that no man
deceive you, and that ye be not doubters and serve other gods.
Many shall come in my name, saying: I am the Christ. Believe
them not, neither draw near unto them. For the coming of the
Son of God shall not be plain (i. e. foreseen) ; but as the lightning
that shineth from the east unto the west, so will I come upon the
clouds of heaven with a great host in my majesty; with my cross
going before my face will I come in my majesty; shining sevenfold
more than the sun will I come in my majesty with all my saints,
mine angels (mine holy angels). And my Father shall set a crown
upon mine head, that I may judge the quick and the dead and
recompense every man according to his works.

And ye, take ye the likeness thereof (learn a parable) from the
fig-tree: so soon as the shoot thereof is come forth and the
twigs grown, the end of the world shall come.

And I, Peter, answered and said unto him: Interpret unto me
concerning the fig-tree, whereby we shall perceive it; for through¬
out all its days doth the fig-tree send forth shoots, and every
year it bringeth forth its fruit for its master. What then meaneth
the parable of the fig-tree ? We know it not.

And the Master (Lord) answered and said unto me: Under-
standest thou not that the fig-tree is the house of Israel ? Even
as a man that planted a fig-tree in his garden, and it brought
forth no fruit. And he sought the fruit thereof many years,
and when he found it not, he said to the keeper of his garden:
Root up this fig-tree that it make not our ground to be un¬
fruitful. And the gardener said unto God: (Suffer us) to rid
it of weeds and dig the ground round about it and water it.
If then it bear not fruit, we will straightway remove its roots
out of the garden and plant another in place of it. Hast thou
not understood that the fig-tree is the house of Israel? Verily
I say unto thee, when the twigs thereof have sprouted forth
in the last days, then shall feigned Christs come and awake
expectation, saying : I am the Christ, that am now come into
the world. And when they (Israel) shall perceive the wickedness
of their deeds they shall turn away after them and deny him [whom
our fathers did praise], even the first Christ whom they crucified
and therein sinned a great sin. But this deceiver is not the Christ.
[Something is wrong here: the sense required is that Israel
perceives the wickedness of antichrist and does not follow him.]
And when they reject him he shall slay with the sword, and there
[page 537]
shall be many martyrs. Then shall the twigs of the fig-tree, that
is, the house of Israel, shoot forth : many shall become martyrs
at his hand. Enoch and Elias shall be sent to teach them that this
is the deceiver which must come into the world and do signs and
wonders to deceive. And therefore shall they that die by his hand
be martyrs, and shall be reckoned among the good and righteous
martyrs who have pleased God in their life. 1

And he showed me in his right hand the souls of all men.
And on the palm of his right hand the image of that which
shall be accomplished at the last day: and how the righteous
and the sinners shall be separated, and how they fdof that are
upright in heart, and how the evil-doers shall be rooted out unto
all eternity. We beheld how the sinners wept (weep) in great
affliction and sorrow, until all that saw it with their eyes wept,
whether righteous or angels, and he himself also.

And I asked him and said unto him: Lord, suffer me to speak
thy word concerning the sinners: It were better for them if they
had not been created. And the Saviour answered and said unto
me: Peter, wherefore speakest thou thus, that not to have been
created were better for them? Thou resistest God. Thou
wouldest not have more compassion than he for his image:
for he hath created them and brought them forth out of not
being. Now because thou hast seen the lamentation which
shall come upon the sinners in the last days, therefore is thine
heart troubled; but I will show thee their works, whereby they
have sinned against the Most High.

Behold now what shall come upon them in the last days,
when the day of God and the day of the decision of the judgement
of God cometh. From the east unto the west shall all the
children of men be gathered together before my Father that
liveth for ever. And he shall command hell to open its bars of
adamant and give up all that is therein.

And the wild beasts and the fowls shall he command to restore
all the flesh that they have devoured, because he willeth that
men should appear; for nothing perisheth before God, and
nothing is impossible with him, because all things are his.

For all things come to pass on the day of decision, on the day
of judgement, at the word of God: and as all things were done
when he created the world and commanded all that is therein
and it was done—even so shall it be in the last days ; for all things
are possible with God. And therefore saith he in the scripture: 2
Son of man, prophesy upon the several bones and say unto the
bones: bone unto bone in joints, sinew, nerves, flesh and skin
and hair thereon [and soul and spirit].

And soul and spirit shall the great Uriel give them at the
1 Hernias, Vision , III. i. 9, speaks of ‘those that have already been
well-pleasing unto God and have suffered for the Name’s sake’.

* Ezek. xxxvii.
[page 538]
commandment of God; for him hath God set over the rising
again of the dead at the day of judgement.

Behold and consider the corns of wheat that are sown in the
earth. As things dry and without soul do men sow them in the
earth: and they live again and bear fruit, and the earth restoreth
them as a pledge entrusted unto it.

[And this that dieth, that is sown as seed in the earth, and shall
become alive and be restored unto life, is man. Probably a gioss.]
How much more shall God raise up on the day of decision
them that believe in him and are chosen of him, for whose sake
he made 1 the world ? And all things shall the earth restore on
the day of decision, for it also shall be judged with them, and
the heaven with it. 2

And this shall come at the day of judgement upon them that
have fallen away from faith in God and that have committed
sin: Floods (cataracts) of fire shall be let loose; and darkness
and obscurity shall come up and clothe and veil the whole world;
and the waters shall be changed and turned into coals of fire,
and all that is in them shall burn, and the sea shall become fire.
Under the heaven shall be a sharp fire that cannot be quenched,
and floweth to fulfil the judgement of wrath. And the stars
shall fly in pieces by flames of fire, as if they had not been created,
and the powers (firmaments) of the heaven shall pass away for
lack of water and shall be as though they had not been, f And
the lightnings of heaven shall be no more, and by their enchant¬
ment they shall affright the worldf (probably : The heaven shall
turn to lightning and the lightnings thereof shall affright the
world). The spirits also of the dead bodies shall be like unto
them (the lightnings?) and shall become fire at the command¬
ment of God.

And so soon as the whole creation dissolveth, the men that are
in the east shall flee unto the west, <and they that are in the
west) unto the east; they that are in the south shall flee to
the north, and they that are in <the north unto) the south.
And in all places shall the wrath of a fearful fire overtake them;
and an unquenchable flame driving them shall bring them unto
the judgement of wrath, unto the stream of unquenchable fire
that floweth, flaming with fire, and when the waves thereof
part themselves one from another, burning, there shall be a great
gnashing of teeth among the children of men.

Then shall they all behold me coming upon an eternal cloud of
brightness: and the angels of God that are with me shall sit
(prob . And I shall sit) upon the throne of my glory at the right
hand of my heavenly Father; and he shall set a crown upon
1 See the Third Epistle to the Corinthians (pp. 290-1) for a dis¬
quisition on the theme, most probably based on our passage.

2 Quoted by the heathen writer in Macarius Magnes: see above
among the fragments (p. 507).

870 l 1
[page 539]
mine head. And when the nations behold it, they shall weep,
every nation apart.

Then shall he command them to enter into the river of fire
while the works of every one of them shall stand before them
(something is wanting) to every man according to his deeds.
As for the elect that have done good, they shall come unto
me and not see death by the devouring fire. But the unrighteous,
the sinners, and the hypocrites shall stand in the depths of
darkness that shall not pass away, and their chastisement is
the fire, and angels bring forward their sins and prepare for
them a place wherein they shall be punished for ever (every one
according to his transgression).

Uriel (Urael) the angel of God shall bring forth the souls of
those sinners (every one according to his transgression: perhaps
this clause should end the preceding paragraph: so Grtbaut takes
it) who perished in the flood, and of all that dwelt in all idols,
in every molten image, in every (object of) love, and in pictures,
and of those that dwelt on all hills and in stones and by the
wayside, whom men called gods: they shall burn them with
them (the objects in which they dwelt, or their worshippers?)
in everlasting fire; and after that all of them with their dwelling-
places are destroyed, they shall be punished eternally.

(II ere begins the description of torments which we have , in another
text , in the Akhmim fragment.)
Gr. 22. Then shall men and women come unto the place pre¬
pared for them. By their tongues wherewith they have
blasphemed the way of righteousness shall they be
hanged up. There is spread under them unquenchable
fire, that they escape it not.
Gr. 23. Behold, another place: therein is a pit, great and
full (of .. ) In it are they that have denied righteous¬
ness : and angels of punishment chastise them and there
do they kindle upon them the fire of their torment.
Gr. 24. And again behold [two: corrupt ] women: they hang
them up by their neck and by their hair; they shall
cast them into the pit. These are they which plaited
their hair, not for good (or, not to make them beautiful)
but to turn them to fornication, that they might
ensnare the souls of men unto perdition. And the men
that lay with them in fornication shall be hung by
their loins in that place of fire; and they shall say one
to another: We knew not that we should come into
everlasting punishment.
Gr. 25. And the murderers and them that have made common
cause with them shall they cast into the fire, in a place
full of venomous beasts, and they shall be tormented
without rest, feeling their pains; and their worms
[page 540]
shall be as many in number as a dark cloud. And the
angel Ezrael shall bring forth the souls of them that
have been slain, and they shall behold the torment of
them that slew them, and say one to another: Righteous¬
ness and justice is the judgement of God. For we
heard, but we believed not, that we should come into
this place of eternal judgement.

And near by this flame shall be a pit, great and Gr. 26.
very deep, and into it floweth from above all manner
of tt° rmen t ; >t foulness, and issue. And women are
swallowed up therein up to their necks and tormented
with great pain. These are they that have caused their
children to be born untimely, and have corrupted the
work of God that created them. Over against them
shall be another place where sit their children [both]
alive, and they cry unto God. And flashes (lightnings) Clem,
go forth from those children and pierce the eyes of them Alex,
that for fornication’s sake have caused their destruction.
Other men and women shall stand above them, Metho-
naked; and their children stand over against them in dius.
a place of delight, and sigh and cry unto God because
of their parents, saying : These are they that have
despised and cursed and transgressed thy command¬
ments and delivered us unto death: they have cursed
the angel that formed us, and have hanged us up, and
withheld from us (or, begrudged us) the light which
thou hast given unto all creatures. And the milk of Clem,
their mothers flowing from their breasts shall congeal, Alex,
and from it shall come beasts devouring flesh, which
shall come forth and turn and torment them for ever
with their husbands, because they forsook the com¬
mandments of God and slew their children. As for
their children, they shall be delivered unto the angel
Temlakos (i. e. a care-taking angel: see above , in the
Fragments ). And they that slew them shall be tormented
eternally, for God willeth it so.

Ezrael the angel of wrath shall bring men and women, Gr. 27.
the half of their bodies burning, and cast them into a
place of darkness, even the hell of men; and a spirit of
wrath shall chastise them with all manner of torment,
and a worm that sleepeth not shall devour their entrails:
and these are the persecutors and betrayers of my
righteous ones.

And beside them that are there, shall be other men Gr. 28.
and women, gnawing their tongues; and they shall
torment them with red-hot iron and burn their
eyes. These are they that slander and doubt of my
righteousness.
[page 541]

Gr. 29. Other men and women whose works were done in
deceitfulness shall have their lips cut off; and fire
entereth into their mouth and their entrails. These are
the false witnesses (al. these are they that caused the
martyrs to die by their lying).

Gr. 30. And beside them, in a place near at hand, fupon the
stone shall be a pillar of fire,f and the pillar is sharper
than swords. And there shall be men and women clad
in rags and filthy garments, and they shall be cast
thereon, to suffer the judgement of a torment that
ceaseth not: these are they that trusted in their riches,
and despised the widows and the woman with fatherless
children . . . before God.

Gr. 31. And into another place hard by, full of filth, do they
cast men and women up to the knees. These are they
that lent money and took usury.

Gr. 82. And other men and women cast themselves down
from an high place and return again and run, and devils
drive them. [These are the worshippers of idols] fand
they put them to the end of their witsf (drive them up
to the top of the height) and they cast themselves down.
And thus do they continually, and are tormented for
ever. These are they which have |cutf their flesh as
[fapostlest] of a man: and the women that were with
them . . . and these are the men that defiled themselves
together as women. ( This is very corrupt: but the sense
is clear in the Greek.)

Gr. 83. And beside them (shall be a brazier?) . . . and beneath
them shall the angel Ezra el prepare a place of much
fire: and all the idols of gold and silver, all idols, the
work of men’s hands, and the semblances of images of
cats and lions, of creeping things and wild beasts, and
the men and women that have prepared the images
thereof, shall be in chains of fire and shall be chastised
because of their error before the idols , and this is their
judgement for ever. (In the Greek they beat each other
with rods of fire: and this is better.)

Gr. 34. And beside them shall be other men and women, burning
in the fire of the judgement, and their torment is ever¬
lasting. These are they that have forsaken the command¬
ment of God and followed the (persuasions ?) of devils.

(Parts of these two sections are in the Bodleian fragment. At

this point the Akhmim fragment ends . The Ethiopic continues:)

And there shall be another place, very high (corrupt sentences

follow. Duensing omits them : Grtbaut renders doubtfully : There

shall be a furnace and a brazier wherein shall burn fire. The fire

that shall burn shall come from one end of the brazier). The
[page 542]
men and women whose feet slip, shall go rolling down into a
place where is fear. And again while the fire that is prepared
floweth, they mount up and fall down again and continue to roll
down. ( This suggests a narrow bridge over a stream of fire which
they keep trying to cross.) Thus shall they be tormented for ever.
These are they that honoured not their father and mother and
of their own accord withheld (withdrew) themselves from them.
Therefore shall they be chastised eternally.

Furthermore the angel Ezrael shall bring children and maidens,
to show them those that are tormented. They shall be
chastised with pains, with hanging up (?) and with a multitude
of wounds which flesh-devouring birds shall inflict upon them.
These are they that boast themselves (trust) in their sins, and
obey not their parents and follow not the instruction of their
fathers, and honour not them that are more aged than they.

Beside them shall be girls clad in darkness for a garment,
and they shall be sore chastised and their flesh shall be torn in
pieces. These are they that kept not their virginity until they
were given in marriage, and with these torments shall they be
punished, and shall feel them.

And again, other men and women, gnawing their tongues
vithout ceasing, and being tormented with everlasting fire.
These are the servants (slaves) which were not obedient unto
iheir masters; and this then is their judgement for ever.

And hard by this place of torment shall be men and women
dumb and blind, whose raiment is white. They shall crowd one
upon another, and fall upon coals of unquenchable fire. These
are they that give alms and say: We are righteous before God:
whereas they have not sought after righteousness.

Ezrael the angel of God fshall bring them forth out of this
fire and establish a judgement of decisionj\ This then is their
judgement. A river of fire shall flow and all f judgement f (they
that are judged) shall be drawn down into the middle of the river.
And Uriel shall set them there.

And there are wheels of fire, and men and women hung thereon
by the strength of the whirling thereof. j*And they that are in
the pit shall burnt: now these are the sorcerers and sorceresses.
fThose wheels shall be in all decision (judgement, punishment)
by fire without numberj*.

Thereafter shall the angels bring mine elect and righteous
which are perfect in all uprightness, and bear them in their
hands, and clothe them with the raiment of the life that is above.
They shall see their desire on them that hated them, when he
punisheth them, and the torment of every one shall be for ever
according to his works.

And all they that are in torment shall say with one voice:
Have mercy upon us, for now know we the judgement of God,
which he declared unto us aforetime, and we believed not. And
[page 543]
the angel Tatirokos (Tartaruchus, keeper of hell: a word corre¬
sponding in formation to Temeluchus) shall come and chastise
them with yet greater torment,and say unto them: Now do ye
repent, when it is no longer the time for repentance, and nought
of life remaineth. And they shall say: Righteous is the judge¬
ment of God, for we have heard and perceived that his judgement
is good; for we are recompensed according to our deeds.

Then will I give unto mine elect and righteous the washing
(baptism) and the salvation for which they have besought me,
in the field of Akrosja (Acherousia, a lake in other writings , e. g.
Apocalypse of Moses—where the soul of Adam is washed in it:
see also Paul 22, 23) which is called Aneslasleja (Elysium).
They shall adorn with flowers the portion of the righteous, and
I shall go ... 1 shall rejoice with them. I will cause the peoples
to enter in to mine everlasting kingdom, and show them that
eternal thing (life?) whereon I have made them to set their hope,
even I and my Father which is in heaven.

I have spoken this unto thee, Peter, and declared it unto thee.
Go forth therefore and go unto the land (or city) of the west.
(Duensing omits the next sentences as unintelligible ; Grtbaut and
N. McLean render thus : and enter into the vineyard which
I shall tell thee of, in order that by the sickness (sufferings) of
the Son who is without sin the deeds of corruption may be
sanctified. As for thee, thou art chosen according to the promise
which I have given thee. Spread thou therefore my gospel
throughout all the world in peace. Verily men shall rejoice:
my words shall be the source of hope and of life, and suddenly
shall the world be ravished.)

(We now have the section descriptive of paradise , which in the
Akhmim text precedes that about hell.)
Gr. 4. And my Lord Jesus Christ our king said unto me:
Let us go unto the holy mountain. And his disciples
Gr. 6. went with him, praying. And behold there were two
Gr. 7. men there, and we could not look upon their faces, for
a light came from them, shining more than the sun,
and their raiment also was shining, and cannot be
described, and nothing is sufficient to be compared
unto them in this world. And the sweetness of them
. . . that no mouth is able to utter the beauty of their
appearance (or, the mouth hath not sweetness to express,
&c.), for their aspect was astonishing and wonderful,
tAnd the other, great, I sayt (probably : and, in a word,
I cannot describe it), shineth in his (sic) aspect above
Gr. 8, 9. crystal. Like the flower of roses is the appearance of the
colour of his aspect and of his body • • • his head (aL
Gr. 10. their head was a marvel). And upon his (their) shoulders
(evidently something about their hair has dropped out)
[page 544]
and on their foreheads was a crown of nard woven of
fair flowers. As the rainbow in the water, 1 so was
their hair. And such was the comeliness of their counten¬
ance, adorned with all manner of ornament. And when Gr. 11.
we saw them on a sudden, we marvelled. And I drew Gr. 12.
near unto the Lord (God) Jesus Christ and said unto
him: O my Lord, who are these? And he said unto Gr. 13.
me: They are Moses and Elias. And I said unto him: Gr. 14.
<Where then are> Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and
the rest of the righteous fathers ? And he showed us Gr. 15.
a great garden, open, full of fair trees and blessed fruits,
and of the odour of perfumes. The fragrance thereof Gr. 16.
was pleasant and came even unto us. And thereof
( al . of that tree) . . . saw I much fruit. And my Lord (Gr. 20).
and God Jesus Christ said unto me: Hast thou seen
the companies of the fathers ?

As is their rest, 2 such also is the honour and the glory of them
that are persecuted for my righteousness’ sake. And I rejoiced
and believed [and believed] and understood that which is written
in the book of my Lord Jesus Christ. And I said unto him:
O my Lord, wilt thou that I make here three tabernacles, one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias? And he said
unto me in wrath: Satan maketh war against thee, and hath
veiled thine understanding; and the good things of this world
prevail against thee. Thine eyes therefore must be opened and
thine ears unstopped that <thou mayest see ?> 3 a tabernacle,
not made with men’s hands, which my heavenly Father hath
made for me and for the elect. And we beheld it and were full
of gladness.

And behold, suddenly there came a voice from heaven, saying:
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: <he hath
kept) my commandments. And then came a great and exceeding
white cloud over our heads and bare away our Lord and Moses
and Elias. And I trembled and was afraid: and we looked up;
and the heaven opened and we beheld men in the flesh, and they
came and greeted our Lord and Moses and Elias and went into
another heaven. And the word of the scripture was fulfilled:
This is the generation that seeketh him and seeketh the face of the
God of Jacob. And great fear and commotion was there in heaven,
and the angels pressed one upon another that the word of the
scripture might be fulfilled which saith: Open the gates, ye princes.
Thereafter was the heaven shut, that had been open.

And we prayed and went down from the mountain, glorifying
God, which hath written the names of the righteous in heaven
in the book of life.
[page 545]

There is a great deal more of the Ethiopic text, but it is very
evidently of later date; the next words are:

‘Peter opened his mouth and said to me: Hearken, my son
Clement; God created all things for his glory,’ and this proposition
is dwelt upon. The glory of those who duly praise God is
described in terms borrowed from the Apocalypse: ‘The Son at
his coming will raise the dead . . . and will make my righteous
ones shine seven times more than the sun , and will make their
crowns shine like crystal and like the rainbow in the time of rain ,
(crowns) which are perfumed with nard and cannot be contemplated ,
(adorned) with rubies, with the colour of emeralds shining
brightly, with topazes, gems, and yellow pearls that shine like
the stars of heaven, and like the rays of the sun, sparkling,
which cannot be gazed upon.’ Again, of the angels: ‘Their faces
shine more than the sun ; their crowns are as the rainbow in the
time of rain . (They are perfumed) with nard. Their eyes shine
like the morning star. The beauty of their appearance cannot be
expressed . . . . Their raiment is not woven, but white as that of
the fuller, according as I saw on the mountain where Moses and
Elias were. Our Lord showed at the transfiguration the apparel
of the last days, of the day of resurrection, unto Peter, James
and John the sons of Zebedee, and a bright cloud overshadowed
us, and we heard the voice of the Father saying unto us: This
is my Son whom I love and in whom I am well pleased: hear him.
And being afraid we forgat all the things of this life and of the
flesh, and knew not what we said because of the greatness of the
wonder of that day, and of the mountain whereon he showed us
the second coming in the kingdom that passeth not away.’

Next: ‘The Father hath committed all judgement unto the
Son.’ The destiny of sinners—their eternal doom—is more than
Peter can endure: he appeals to Christ to have pity on them.
And my Lord answered me and said to me: * Hast thou under¬
stood that which I said unto thee before ? It is permitted unto
thee to know that concerning which thou askest: but thou
must not tell that which thou hearest unto the sinners lest they
transgress the more, and sin.’ Peter weeps many hours, and is
at last consoled by an answer which, though exceedingly diffuse
and vague, does seem to promise ultimate pardon for all: ‘My
Father will give unto them all the life, the glory, and the kingdom
that passeth not away,’ ... ‘It is because of them that have
believed in me that I am come. It is also because of them that
have believed in me, that, at their word, I shall have pity on men. 9
The doctrine that sinners will be saved at last by the prayers of
the righteous is, rather obscurely, enunciated in the Second Book
of the Sibylline Oracles (a paraphrase, in this part, of the
Apocalypse), and in the (Coptic) Apocalypse of Elias (see post).
Ultimately Peter orders Clement to hide this revelation in
a box, that foolish men may not see it.
