Source: James Cooper and Arthur John Maclean, The Testament of Our Lord, translated into English from the Syriac. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1902, pages 47-138.
Public domain by age. Scanned by the Internet Archive; archive.org/details/cu31924029296170

The Testamentum Domini, the church order whose Ge’ez version is the first book of the Mets'hafe Kidan. This is the Syriac, not the Ge’ez: Cooper and Maclean say the Ethiopic was unpublished when they wrote, and it is still not in public-domain English. Every leaf carries a head; the versos repeat and the rectos name their own page, so the printed page number is what takes them off.

Recovered from the scan's word coordinates by tools/scans.py, run from tools/fetch_scans.py: the running heads, the marginal line-numbers and the footnotes are taken off by where they sit on the leaf. Each [page n] below is the scan's own image number, so any line here can be put beside the leaf it came from. Lines are the printed lines. A blank line means a paragraph opens on the line after it; the page markers carry no blank line of their own, so that a paragraph broken by a page turn stays one paragraph.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[page 66]
[page 68]

THE: TESTAMENT, OR WORDS WHICH OUR
LORD, WHEN HE ROSE FROM THE DEAD,
SPAKE TO THE HOLY APOSTLES, AND
WHICH WERE WRITTEN IN EIGHT BOOKS
BY CLEMENT OF ROME, THE DISCIPLE OF
PETER?

THE FIRST BOOK
Ir came to pass, after our Lord rose from the dead, and
appeared unto us, and was handled ® by Thomas and Matthew
and John, and we were persuaded that our Master* was
truly risen from the dead, that falling on our faces we blessed
the Father of the new world,> God, Who hath saved us by
Jesus Christ our Lord; and being held® in very great fear,
we waited prostrate as babes which speak not.’ But Jesus
our Lord, putting His hand on each one of us separately,
lifted us up, saying, Why hath your heart thus fallen, and
are ye stricken with great astonishment? Know ye not that
He who sent Me can do glorious things for the salvation of
them that have from the heart believed on Him? Stand not
then as [men] astonished, and staring’ neither [be] slothful,
1 The number 77 is prefixed in M.

2 Codex S.: The first book of Clement, which is called the Testament of our
Lord Jesus Christ ; the words which, after He rose from the dead, He spake to
the holy Apostles. The Copto-Arabic version renders it with several varia-
tions. In Codex C. the preface is: And it came to pass after our Lord returned
to life and rose from the grave on the third day and revealed Himself to His
holy disciples and spake with them, they said unto Him afterwards: Tell us,
O our Lord (as in chapter 2).

3 Lit.: touched. 1Johni. 1. 4Lit.: Teacher. 5S.: worlds.
6 §. has ‘we trembled ” (root HRD), as Lagarde renders it (see Payne-Smith’s
Thesaurus Syriacus, col. 1367).

7 Lit. : without voice. Copto-arab. : we fell to the ground as dead.

§ So S. B. understand it (Lagarde, éveol aiéovuevor). Or: as astonished ones,
fashioned [like statues].

4
[page 69]
but as the children of light} ask of My Father which is in
heaven the Spirit of counsel and might,? and He will fill you
with the Holy Ghost and grant you to be with Me for ever.
CHaPTer 1?

And we returned answer, saying, Lord,* what is the Holy
Ghost, and what is His power, whom Thou badest® us to
ask for? And our Lord said unto us, Verily I say unto you
that ye shall not be the children of the light? except by the
Holy Ghost. And we returned answer to Him, and said,
O our Lord, give us this [Spirit]. And immediately Jesus °
breathed on us.’ And after we had received the Holy Ghost,
He said unto us, Verily® I say unto you, that ye who have
been made disciples unto the kingdom of heaven, and who
have believed in Me with undoubting heart, and have cleaved
unto Me, shall be with Me; and all those who through you
know and do the will of My Father, who keep My words and
know My sufferings,® shall be made holy, and shall dwell in
the habitations ! of My Father, and shall be delivered from
the evil days that are about to come; and I will be with them,
shewing them My ways in which they shall live.

CHAPTER 2 1!

And Peter and John answered and said unto Him :—Tell
us, O our Lord, the signs of the end,!? and all the deeds which
shall then be [done] by them™ who live in this world, so
that we also may make [them] known to them who believe in
[page 70]
Thy Name in all the nations, that those? generations may
observe * [them] and live. But Jesus answered and said :—
‘Did I not, before I suffered for those that dwell on the earth,
tell you some things about the end?? We answered and
said, [Yea,] O our Lord; but now we desire to know the
deeds which [are] the signs of the end of this world, if our
Lord hath judged that this is fitting for us to know *—for us,
and for those who [shall] hear.

CHAPTER 35

And Jesus answered and said:—In the time when I
was in the world,® I spoke unto you before I should be
glorified, of signs that the end is near, thus:—that there
shall be on earth famines and pestilences,’ tumults, and
commotions, risings of nations against nations, and those
other things whereof I have told you*® But I commanded
you to watch and pray.® And now hear, ye children of the
light ; for My Father who hath sent Me to His inheritance
hath predetermined ” in His foreknowledge," that in the last
days, out of the latest generation,” there should be vessels 18
[of grace] holy, and honoured, and elect. Wherefore I make
known unto you exactly [what are] the things which are
about to be, and when he shall arise,!* that Son of Perdition,
the Enemy, the 1° Adversary,” and what he is like.
[page 71]

CHAPTER 4

There shall, then, be signs when the kingdom is approach-
ing such as these. After the famines and pestilences and
tumults among the nations,! then there shall rule, and rise to
power, princes who love money, who hate the truth, who kill
their brethren, liars, haters of the faithful,? proud, lovers of
gold, allied by relationship but not allied in counsel,® for
they wish each to destroy the life of his fellow. But there
shall be in their hosts great affliction, and flight,® and blood-
shed.

CHaprer 57

But there shall arise also in the West a king of foreign
race, a prince of great craft, godless,$ a homicide, a deceiver, a
lover of gold, great at devices,? a hater of the faithful,” a
persecutor44; and he shall bear rule also over barbarous
nations, and shall shed much blood. At that time silver
shall be despised and gold be honoured; and in every city
and every country there shall be spoiling and robbery, and
there shall be # spilling of blood.

CHAPTER 6 18

Then there shall be signs in heaven. A bow shall be
seen, and a horn, and lights; and noises out of season, and
[page 72]
sounds and ragings of the sea? and a roaring*® of the
earth.

CuarTer 7 +4

But on the earth shall be signs; the birth® of dragons
from mankind, and likewise also of wild beasts®; and young
women newly wedded shall bring forth’ babes who speak
perfectly ® and announce® the last times, and pray” to be
put to death. And their looks shall be the looks of [men]
far advanced in years ; they shall be grey-headed when they are
born. Also women ” shall bear babes with four feet : some
shall bear spirits only, and some’ shall bear their progeny
with * unclean spirits. Others [there] shall [be who] practise
divination in the womb, and shall speak with familiar
spirits ®; and there shall be many other horrible signs.”
z.

CHAPTER 8 38

But in the assemblies,® and®° nations, and churches,
there shall be many tumults, for there shall arise evil
4C.: a sound of all sorts of storms. 2 St. Luke xxi. 25,

3 Lit.: crying; S.: eryings. 48.: Of [signs] on earth.

5 So C. M. B. Treves fragm.; 8.: births.

§ Tréves fragm.: serpents.

7C.: others who being but boys take wives shall bring forth (sic) ; see Note.
Cf. 2 Esdras vi. 21. Tréves fragm. has ‘‘a newly wed young woman shall
bring forth” (mox nubserit femina pariet !).

8 Lit.: perfect words. So also Tréves fragm.

* Or: signify. ¥ Lit.: persuade.

11 Lit.: those who are born shall be white. (So Tréves fragm. also; C.: old
men).

2 Tréves fragm.: other women.
18 Lit.: these. Tréves fragm.: but other women shall bring forth wind only
(singular ; the same Syriac word in plural is ‘‘spirits’’) ; cf. Isa. xxvi. 18.
14 Copto-arab.: possessed with. Tréves fragm., as S. M. B. C., has ‘‘ with”
only.
[page 73]
shepherds unjust slothful? avaricious, lovers of pleasures,*
lovers of gains® lovers of money, talkative, boastful,°
haughty, gluttonous,’ perverse, rash, given to delights, vain-
glorious’ opposing the ways of? the Gospel and fleeing
from the strait gate® removing from themselves every
humiliation and not sorrowing for My humiliation,” reject-
ing all the words of truth, and despising” all the ways of
piety, and not mourning for their sins. Therefore’ there
shall be shed abroad among the nations unbelief, hatred of
the brotherhood,® wickedness, bitterness, slothfulness,® envy,
hatred, strife, theft, oppression, drunkenness, debauchery,””
lasciviousness,!8 licentiousness, fornication, and all such works
as are contrary to the commandments of life. For from
many mourning and gentleness shall flee away, and peace
and meekness, and poverty and piety, and tears,” because the
shepherds heard ®° these things, and did not do them, and
moreover did not shew”! My commandments, seeing that
they [themselves] are examples of wickedness in the nation.”
But the time shall come when some of them will deny Me,
and will stir up* confusions in the earth,* and put their
trust in a corruptible® king. But they who in My Name
endure?’ unto the end shall be saved.28 Then they shall
ordain commandments for men, [commandments] unlike the
[page 74]
book of commandments! in which? the Father is well
pleased?; and My elect* and My holy ones shall be
rejected® by them, and called among them, as it were, the
polluted. Yet these are the upright ones, pure, sad, merciful,
quiet, kind, always knowing Him who is among them ® at
all times, and they shall be called mad for My sake, who
have saved’ them. It shall come to pass also in those days
that My Father shall gather together ® out of that generation
the pure ones, even the pure and faithful souls, those to
whom I will appear, and with whom I will make My
habitation, and I will send to them the understanding ® of
knowledge and of truth, and the understanding® of holiness,
and they shall not cease praising’ and giving thanks to
their God,! My Father who sent Me; and they shall speak
the truth at all times, and they shall teach [others] whose
spirit they have tried * [and have found] that they are up-
right 3 and worthy, as for the kingdom," and shall instruct
them in knowledge and strength and prudence. And those
who suffer persecution because they live in piety shall receive
the reward of their praise. And it shall be in those times
that all the kingdoms shall be disturbed, and all the world %
also [shall see] affliction 1° and want; and all this world shall
be reputed as nothing ; and all its possessions shall be destroyed
1§,: and the commandment.

2 Te. the commandments. Lagarde: in whom (but the text of S. is prob-
ably wrong).

3C.: precepts not according to my will, and traditions in which My Father
is not well pleased.

4SoC. S.; M. B.: my men (viri). 5 Or: despised.

6 Lagarde: knowing that he is among them (the text of S. is apparently
corrupt).

780 C. M. B.; S.: commanded. § St. Mark xiii. 27.

® Or: reasoning. Or: glorifying (so frequently).
[page 75]
by many [destroyers], and there shall be great scarcity of
crops, and the winter shall be very severe; and the princes *
shall be few in number and small, who have rule over? gold
and over silver, and are rich in all those things which are in
this world; and the children of this world shall hold their
storerooms and barns, and shall have rule over the markets of
buying and selling.® Many shall be afflicted,* and on that
account shall call upon their God that they may be delivered.
Blessed are they who are not [alive] at that time; and [blessed]
they [also] who shall be® [alive indeed], but ® [shall] endure.
For when these things shall come to pass, then soon she that
travaileth is near to bring forth,’ for the® time is fulfilled.

CHAPTER 9?

Then shall come the Son of Perdition, the Adversary,
who boasteth and exalteth himself° working many signs and
miracles, that he may deceive the whole earth,” and over-
come the innocent,® My holy ones. Blessed are they who
endure in those days. But woe to those who are deceived.
CHAPTER 10%

But Syria shall be plundered, and shall weep for her sons.
Cilicia shall lift wp her neck until He who judgeth her shall
appear. The daughter of Babylon shall arise from the throne
of her glory, that she may drink that ' wine ” which is mixed
for her. Cappadocia, Lycia,!* Lycaonia shall bow down the
[page 76]
back, for many multitudes shall be depraved by the corruption
of their wickednesses.! And then shall be opened the camps of
the barbarians, for many chariots shall go forth so as to cover
[the face of] the earth. In all Armenia, and in Pontus, and
in Bithynia ? the young men shall fall by the sword, and the
sons and the daughters shall be captives. [The sons and the
daughters] of Lycaonia shall be mingled in [their] blood. Pisidia
which boasteth, and trusteth in [her] riches, shall be over-
thrown [even] to the ground. The sword shall pass through
Phoenicia, because [her inhabitants] are children of corruption.
Judaea shall clothe herself with lamentation, and shall be made
ready for the day of destruction, because of her uncleanness.
Then shall she gather together the abomination of desolation.*
The East shall be opened® by him®; also the ways shall be
opened’ by him. Sword and flame [are] in his hands: he
burneth with anger and fiery indignation. This is the armour
of the judgment of the corruption of them that are born in
the earth; the extermination of the faithful, the way® of
bloodshed ®; for his way is in error and his power is to blas-
pheme,” and his hand for deception, his right hand in misery,
and his left hand in darkness.

CHAPTER 111

And these are the signs of him”: his head [is] as a fiery
flame: his right eye shot with blood, his left [eye] blue-
black, and he “ hath two pupils. His eyelashes * are white ;
[page 77]
and? his lower lip is large; but his right thigh slender ;? his feet
broad ; his great toe is bruised‘ and flat. This is the sickle of
desolation.5

CHAPTER 12

Therefore I say unto you, [ye] children of the light, that
the time is at hand, and the harvest is ripe® that sinners
should be harvested in judgment. And to many the Judge
shall arise as one who is kind,’ and shall impute to them their
own works.’ But when He® shall be at hand, a sign shall
be given to? the elect, who keep the law of My Father.

CHAPTER 13 4

Then ® those who fear My words, and do them in truth
and with a faithful mind,” shall watch and pray ® without
ceasing,!§ reckoning continual supplication as a work, in nothing
wandering or going about!” in this world, and in nothing
anxious, but 18 with an austere 1 soul and a mind that doubteth
not,” daily taking on them the cross,”4 to do the will of My
18. omits: and.

2 Treves fragm.: his right thigh lean, the shin bones slender. So in the
Apocryphal Apocalypse of John, Antichrist has the legs of a cock (James, Apoc.
Anecd. 156, 187).

3 Or: finger. 4 Treves fragm.. broken.

5M. B. omit thisclause. See Note for other MSS.

6 Cf. Rev. xiv. 15 in the Greek. See Note for the reading of C.

7 Lagarde vocalises the Syriac differently, and renders ws év émGeclg. This
is improbable.

8 Ie. for merit ; lit.: shall raise over them their works, sc. for a shield in
the day of trial. In the day of judgment, they shall be justified by their works.
Cf. II. 15, and p. 28. Possibly there is a reference to Rev. xiv. 13. See Notes
for the Treves fragm.

°C.: that Son of Perdition. 10 Lit.: with.
11B.: laws; C.: laws and precepts.
12§.,: Of the approach of the time of judgment.
18 Copto-arab.: Then our Lord Jesus Christ commanded us, saying : Say to
them who fear My words and fulfil them in truth that they pray . . .
4 C, omits: with a faithful mind. 1 St. Matt. xxvi. 41.
16 1 Thess. v. 17. 17 Or: wrapped up.
18M. B.: also not. ! §. margin: contrite.
20 B.: a doubting mind (error); C.: when also they take up with nothing but
with a manly soul and unhesitating mind.
21 Cf, St. Luke ix. 28.
[page 78]
Father which is in heaven, with a meek heart. For He who
is anxious about them that trust in the truth, and careth for
them, is the Lord; and He sendeth to them those things
which are right and fitting *—those things which He knoweth,
and by the hands of them whom He knoweth.

CHAPTER 14

I have told you these things, therefore, that wherever ye
go, ye may test the souls that are holy,? and tell them those
things which are fitting and right, and those things which are
about to be,* and all those things which, before I was > glorified,®
I gave you in commandment,’ so that believing [them] they
may truly live® From henceforth shall be® the beginning of
travail,’® and the mystery of destruction." Turning therefore
to the Church,” setting right, duly ordering, and arranging,
and doing all things in uprightness and holiness, speak to every
man as is helpful to him, so that your Father which is in
heaven may be glorified1® Be ye wise, that ye may persuade
those who are in captivity to error,® and those who are sunk
in ignorance, that coming to the knowledge of! God, and
living piously and purely, they may praise My Father and
your God.}8

CHAPTER 15

Now after Jesus had spoken these words, Peter and John
[page 79]
and Thomas and Matthew and Andrew and Matthias (?) and
the rest said: O our Lord, truly Thou hast spoken to us now
also words of warning and of truth, and though we are not
worthy Thou hast bestowed upon us many things, and hast
granted also to those of future generations who are worthy, to
know Thy words and to flee from the snares of the Evil One.
But, O our Lord, we beseech Thee, make Thy perfect light to
shine upon us, and upon those who are foreordained and
separated to be Thine. Because! that we have many times
asked Thee, we pray Thee teach us of what sort he ought to
be who standeth at the head of the Church, or with what rule
he should raise up and order the Church. For it is urgent
that when we are sent to the nations to preach the salvation
which is from Thee, it should not escape us as to how it is
fitting to arrange the mysteries of the Church. Therefore
from Thy mouth,? O our Saviour and Perfecter, we desire to
learn without omission how the Chief of the holy things ought
to please Thee, and [likewise] all those who minister in Thy
Church.

CHAPTER 16 3

Then Martha and Mary, and Salome, who were with us,‘
answered and said :—Yea, O our Lord, teach us to know what
we ought to do, that our souls may live unto Thee. Then
Jesus answered and said unto them: I will that, persevering
in supplication,’ ye should always serve My Gospel, and be
examples of ® holiness, for the salvation of those who trust
patiently’ in Me; and in all things be figures of the kingdom
of heaven.

CHAPTER 17

But to us also Jesus said:—Because that ye also have
asked Me concerning the rule ecclesiastical, I deliver and
make known to you how ye ought to order and command
[page 80]
him who standeth at the head of the Church, and to keep the
perfect and just and most excellent rule, in which My Father
who hath sent Me is well pleased. Verily I say unto you,
that he who knoweth the power of this commandment and of
this testament, and doeth according to those things which are
written therein, shall be made like! unto the angels who
praise My Father? and shall be holy unto God.

But My Father is mediator? and all His host, that if
their sins are as the sand of the sea[shore] which cannot
be numbered,* and any of them, understanding these words,
shall do them, these sins shall be forgiven him, and he
shall live in Me.

CHAPTER 18

But because in the midst of the assembly of the people
[there are], more and more, many carnal desires, and the
labourers are feeble® and few, only My perfect labourers
shall know the multitude of My words, all also which at
times® I spake to you in private before I should suffer, and
which ye know; ye both have them and understand them.
For My mysteries are given to those who are Mine, with
whom I shall rejoice and be glad with My Father. When
they shall be loosed from [this] life they shall come to Me.
But these remaining words, determining and appointing
them, speak ye in the Churches.

But from the day that My faithful ones also have the
desire to know, that they may do the things of My Father,
what[soever is] in this My testament, I will be with them,
and will be praised among them, and I will make My habita-
tion with them, by power informing them of the will of My
Father.

See that ye give not My holy things to the dogs, and
cast not pearls before swine,’ as I have often commanded you.
10Qr: shall be like. There is a reminiscence of St. Luke xx. 36 (?).

2 B.: the glorious angels of My Father.

3 Or: arbiter.

4 Jer, xxxiii, 22 (order altered and words applied to an altogether different
object).

5 Or: small. ® Or: many times. 7 St. Matt. vii. 6.
[page 81]
Give not My holy things! to defiled and wicked men who do
not bear My cross, and are not subject [to Me]; and My com-
mandments shall be for derision among them. And it? shall
be to him that is embittered # and doeth them not, but giveth
My words without profit, for the destruction of their souls.
But it* shall be spoken and given to those who are firm
and fixed, and do not fall away, who keep> My command-
ments and this tradition, [to the end] that they, keeping these
[things], may abide holy and upright and strong in Me,
fleeing from the downfall of iniquity and the death of sin;
the Holy Ghost [also] bestowing upon them His grace, that
they may believe uprightly,® that they may in the Spirit
spiritually know the things of the Spirit,’ and in hope®
endure labour, and in joy serve My Gospel,’ and bear the
reproach of My cross, not doubting but [rather] glorying®;
for verily I say unto you, that such as these [men] and such
as these [women] shall, after death, dwell ° in the third order
of My Father who hath sent Me.

([CHarreR 191]

T tell you therefore how the sanctuary? ought to be;
then I will make known the holy rule of the priests of the
Church.

Let the church then be thus: let it have three entrances
as a type of the Trinity.

Let the diaconicum * be on the right of the right hand
entrance, that the eucharists,'* or offerings which are offered,
may be seen. Let there be a fore-court, with a portico %
going round, to the diaconicum.
[page 82]

Then within the fore-court let there be a place [to serve]
for a baptistery, its length twenty-one cubits as a general ?
type of the prophets, and its width twelve cubits as a type of
those who have been determined to preach the Gospel,’ with
one entrance and three exits.

Let the Church have a house of the catechumens, which
shall be also the house of the exorcists. Let it not be de-
tached from the Church, but so that those who enter and are
in it may hear the lections* and spiritual hymns of praise
and psalms.>

Let there be a throne by the altar ®; on the right and on
the left [let there be] the places of the presbyters, so that on
the right may sit those who are more exalted and honoured,
and those who labour in the word’; but those who are of
middle age® on the left hand. But that place where the
throne is, let it® be raised three steps, for there the altar
ought to be.

Let that house have two porches, on the right and on
the left, for men and for women.

Let all the places be lighted, both for a type, and also for
reading.

Let the altar have a veil of pure linen, for it is without
spot.

Also the baptistery likewise, let it be under a veil.

Let a place be built as for commemoration, so that the
priest and chief deacon sitting with the readers may write the
names of those who offer the oblations, or of those for whom
they have offered [them], so that when the holy things are
offered by the bishop, the reader or chief deacon may name
them by way of commemoration, which the priests’ and
[page 83]
people offer for them with supplication. For there is this-
type also in heaven.?
Let the place of the. presbyters be within the veil, beside
that place of commemoration.
Let the house of the offering and the treasury be quite ”
beside the diaconicum.
But let the place of the lection 3 be a little outside the altar.
Let the house of the bishop be beside that place which is
called the fore-court.
Also that of those widows who are called “those that sit
in front.”
Also let that of the presbyters and deacons be behind
the baptistery.*
_Let the deaconesses abide beside the door of the Lord’s
house.
Let the Church have a house for entertaining near by,
where the chief deacon shall entertain strangers.

CHAPTER 20
Now after the house is [built] as is fitting and right, let the
bishop ® be appointed, being chosen by all the people accord-
ing to the will of the Holy Ghost,® being without fault,’ chaste,$
quiet, mild, without anxiety, watchful,° not a money-lover!
blameless," not quarrelsome, ready to forgive, a teacher,
not given to much speaking, a lover of good things,» a lover
of labour, a lover of widows, a lover of orphans, a lover of the
[page 84]
poor, experienced in the mysteries,’ not lax? and distracted
in company with this world, peaceful, and in all good things
perfect, as one to whom the order and? place of God is
entrusted. It is good indeed that + he be without a wife, but
at any rate that he have been® the husband of one wife only,
so that he may sympathise with the weakness of widows.
Let him be appointed when he is of middle age, not a youth.
CHAPTER 21

Being such as this, let him receive ordination” on the first
day of the week, all consenting to his appointment, and bearing
witness to him, with all the neighbouring presbyters and
bishops. Let those bishops lay hands on him, having first
washed their hands, but let the presbyters stand beside them,
not speaking, in fear, lifting up their hearts in silence.

After [that], let the bishops lay hands on him, saying:
We lay hands on the servant of God, who hath been
chosen in the Spirit, for the true and pious ® disposing ® of the
Church, which alone hath the principality, and which is not
dissolved, of the invisible [and] living God, and for the de-
livering of true judgment and divine and holy revelations,
and of divine gifts and faithful doctrines of the Trinity, by
the cross, by the resurrection, by the incorruptibility, in the
holy Church of God.

After this, one bishop, commanded by the other bishops, shall
lay hands on him, saying his calling of appointment, thus :

PRAYER OF ORDINATION™ oF A BISHOP

O God, who hast done ™ all things in power, and hast
established them, and hast founded the inhabited world in
reason, and hast adorned the crown of all these things which
! Or: sacraments. 2M.B.: carried away. 3M.: or.
4 B. inserts : also. 5 Or: was.

8 Not worded as 1 Tim. iii. 2 and Tit. i. 6; though the reference is clear.
See Note.

7 Lit.: laying on of the hand. 8 evoeBys translated. So always.

® kardoraots transliterated. 1 Probably Greek udvapyxos (see p. 16).
Nl yecporovia transliterated. 2 Or: made.

5
[page 85]
were made by Thee; who hast given to them to keep
Thy commandments in fear; who hast bestowed upon us
the understanding of the truth, and hast made known unto
us that good Spirit of Thine; who didst send Thy beloved
Son, the only Saviour, without spot, for our salvation; O God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Father of mercies and
God of all comfort who in the pure heights dost dwell
eternally, who art high and adorable, dreadful? and great ;
who seest all things, who knowest all things before they are,
with whom all things were before they were [made]*; who
gavest illumination to the Church by the grace * of Thy Only-
begotten Son, having foreordained from the beginning those
who delight in just things, and do those things that are holy,
to dwell in Thy habitations ; who didst choose Abraham, who
pleased Thee by his faith, and didst translate holy Enoch °
to the treasure-house of life; who hast ordered princes and
priests in Thine upper” sanctuary; O Lord, who didst call
[them] to praise and glorify the Name of Thee and of Thy
Only-begotten in the place of Thy glory; O Lord God, who
before the foundation of the world didst not leave Thine
upper’ sanctuary without a ministry, and also, since the
foundation of the world, hast adorned and glorified Thy
sanctuaries [on earth] with faithful princes and priests, after
the pattern ® of Thine [own] heaven; Thou, Lord, even now
also art ® well pleased to be praised, and hast vouchsafed that
there should be princes for Thy people: Cause to shine forth
and pour out understanding, and the grace which cometh
from Thy princely Spirit, which 4 Thou didst deliver to Thy
beloved Son Jesus Christ; give wisdom, O God, [give] reason-
ing,” strength, power, unity of spirit 1° to do all things by Thy
[page 86]
co-operation. Give the Spirit which is Thine, O holy God;
send to Thy holy and pure Church, and to every place which
singeth to Thee “Holy,” Him who was given to Thy Holy
One ; and grant, O Lord, that this Thy servant may please
Thee? for doxology,? and for laud without ceasing, O God, for
fitting hymns of praise, and for suitable times,* for acceptable
prayers, for faithful asking, for an upright mind, for a meek
heart, for the working of life and of meekness and of truth,
for the knowledge of uprightness. O Father, who knowest
the hearts,> [grant] to this Thy servant whom Thou hast
chosen for the episcopate, to feed Thy holy flock, and to stand
at the head of the priesthood without fault, ministering to
Thee day and night; grant that Thy face® may be seen by
him ; vouchsafe, O Lord, that he may offer to Thee the offer-
ings of Thy holy Church carefully [and] with all fear ; bestow
upon him that he may have Thy powerful?’ Spirit to loose all
bands, as Thou didst bestow [Him] on Thy apostles, to please
Thee in meekness; fill him full of love, knowledge, under-
standing, discipline, perfectness, strength, and a pure heart,
when he prayeth for the people, and when he mourneth for
those who commit folly and draweth them to [receive] help;
when he offereth to Thee praises and thanksgivings and
prayers for a sweet-smelling savour® through Thy beloved
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [are given] to Thee
praise and honour and might, with the Holy Ghost, both
before the worlds, and also now, and at all times, and for ever
and ever without end. Amen.

And let the people say: Amen. And then let them® cry
out : He is worthy, He is worthy, He is worthy.

After he is [ordained], let the people keep the feast
three days, according to the mystery that in three days [our
[page 87]
Lord] rose from the dead. And let every one give him the
Peace.

CHAPTER 22

Let him be constant at the altar; in prayers let him be
persistent day and night, especially at the obligatory times of
night; at the first hour, at midnight, and at early twilight
when the star of the dawn riseth. Then also in the morning,’
at the third, sixth, ninth [hours, and the] twelfth hour at the
lamp [lighting]. If also at every hour he offer prayers with-
out ceasing for the people and for himself, he doeth well. Let
him abide in the house of the Church alone. If he have one
or two likeminded ? with himself, it is good that he should be
with them for united supplication in unison? For where two
or three are gathered together in My Name, ye know that I
have said unto you that I am in the midst of them.* But if
he cannot abide all night long, yet let him remain these hours
that I have said. For then the angels visit the Church.

Let him fast three days each [week]® (?) all the year.
But for three weeks after his appointment let him maintain
the fast according to the number of the eighteen Exalted
Entrances by which the Only-begotten passed when He came
to the passion. But on the first day of the week only let
him feed on bread with oil and honey and salt, and all fruits of
trees; but let him in no wise taste wine, except only the cup
of the Offering. This® let him use whether ill or well. For it
is good that this be for the priests only.’ And so after these
weeks all the year, let him fast three days each § [week]; and
for the rest of the time let him fast according to his strength.
But in no wise let him eat meat, not because if he taste or
eat [meat] he is to be blamed, but because when he loveth
infirmity these strong meats are not fitting,!° and in order that
he may watch.
[page 88]

Let the Offering + only be on Saturday, or on the first day
of the week, and on a fast-day. On the eve? let him instruct
and teach these things in the manner of a mystery to® those
whom he hath tested + as having ears to hear’ But if he be
sick in body, let him quickly take care to heal himself, feeding
on fish, and constantly [taking] a little wine of the Holy thing,
that the Church may not also come to an end because he is
lying sick ; but [that] those who learn may receive joy. But
when teaching in the Church, let him speak thus carefully, as
a man who knoweth that he is speaking for a testimony the
doctrine of all the ministry of the Father of all, that [doctrine]
which is accurately written. Let him say all these things—all
those which he accurately knoweth and remembereth of old.§
For if he knoweth what he saith, he may have hope that his
hearers also [will] have known these things. And with all
his labour, let him beseech the Lord, so that his word may
bring forth the fruits’ of the Holy Spirit in them that hear.
Let him do everything in order, and with knowledge.
Let him dismiss the catechumens after he hath admonished
them with meditations ® and admonitions of the Prophets and
Apostles? with instructive words, so that they may know Him
whom they confess. But let him teach the faithful after the
manner of a mystery, having first dismissed the catechumens ;
and after the instruction in the mysteries let him offer, so that
knowing in what mystery they are taking part, they may offer
with fear.

CHAPTER 23

Let him offer on Saturday three loaves for a complete
symbol” of the Trinity ; but on the first day of the week let
him offer four loaves for a complete symbol! of the Gospel.
[page 89]
Because that the ancient people erred, when he offereth
let the veil in front of the door be closed, and within it let
him offer with the presbyters and deacons and the canonical
widows, and subdeacons and deaconesses and readers [and]
those who have gifts. But let the bishop stand first in the
middle, and the presbyters immediately behind him on either
side, and the widows immediately behind the presbyters on
the left side, and the deacons also behind the presbyters on
the right hand side; the readers behind them, and the sub-
deacons behind the readers, and the deaconesses behind the
subdeacons.

Let the bishop then place his hand on those loaves which
have been set on the altar, and let the presbyters place their
hands together with him, and let the rest stand only.?

Let not the loaf of catechumens® be received; not even
if he have a believing son or wife and wish to offer on their
behalf; let it not be offered + unless he is baptized

Before the bishop or presbyter offereth, let the people
give the Peace ® to one another.

Then, a great silence being made, let the deacon say
thus :

ADMONITION OF THE DEACON ON THE EUCHARIST?

[Lift up] your hearts to ® heaven.

If any man have wrath against his companion, let him be
reconciled.®

If any man have’ a conscience without faith, let him
confess [it].

If any man have a thought foreign to the commandments,
let him depart.

If any man have fallen into sin, let him not hide himself:
he may # not hide himself.!
[page 90]
If any man have a disordered reason, let him not draw near.
If any man be defiled, if any man be not firm, let him

give place.
If any man be a stranger to the commandments of Jesus,

let him depart.
If any man despise the prophets, let him separate himself :

from the wrath of the Only-begotten let him deliver himself.
Let us not despise the cross.
Let us flee from threatening.
We have our Lord as onlooker, the Father of Lights? with

the Son, [and] the angels * who visit [us].
See to yourselves that ye be not in* anger against your

neighbours.
See that no man be in wrath: God seeth.
[Lift] wp your hearts to offer for the salvation of life and

of holiness.
In the wisdom of God let us receive the grace which hath

been bestowed upon us.
Then let the bishop say, giving and rendering thanks with

an awed voice :

Our Lord [be] with you.

And let the people say: And with thy spirit.

Let the bishop say : [Lift] up your hearts.

Let the people say : They are [lifted up] unto the Lord.

Let the bishop say : Let us give thanks to the Lord.

And let all the people say: It is meet and right.

And let the bishop ery: Holy things in holy [persons].

And let the people call out: In heaven and on earth without
ceasing.
EUCHARIST ® OR THANKSGIVING OVER THE OFFERING &
Let the bishop immediately say :
We render thanks to Thee, O God, the Holy One, Con-
[page 91]
firmer of our souls, and Giver of our life, the Treasure of
incorruptibility, and Father of the Only-begotten, our Saviour,
whom ‘in the latter times Thou didst send to us as a Saviour
and Proclaimer of Thy purpose For it is Thy purpose * that
we should be saved in Thee. Our heart giveth thanks unto
Thee, O Lord, [our] mind, [our] soul, with all [its] thinking,
that Thy grace may come upon us, O Lord, so that we may
continually praise Thee, and Thy Only-begotten Son, and Thy
Holy Ghost, now and alway, and for ever and ever. Amen.
O Thou Power of the Father, the Grace of the nations,
Knowledge, true Wisdom, the Exaltation of the meek, the
Medicine of souls,? the Confidence of us who believe,* for Thou
art the Strength of the righteous, the Hope of the persecuted,
the Haven of those who are buffeted, the Uluminator of the
perfect, the Son of the living God’ make to arise on us, out of
Thy gift which cannot be searched into, courage, might, reliance,
wisdom, strength, unlapsing faith, unshaken hope, the know-
ledge of Thy Spirit, meekness [and] uprightness, so that alway,
O Lord, we Thy servants, and all the people, may praise Thee
purely, may bless Thee, may give thanks unto Thee, Lord, at
all times, and may beseech Thee.

And also let the bishop say :

Thou, Lord, the Founder of the heights, and King of the
treasuries of light, Visitor of the heavenly Sion, King of the
orders of archangels,’ of Dominions, Praises, Thrones, Raiments,
Lights, Joys, Delights, the Father of kings, who holdest all in
Thy hand, and suppliest’” [all] by Thy reason, through Thine
Only-begotten Son who was crucified for our sins: Thou,
Lord, didst send Thy Word, who is of Thy counsel and
covenants by whom Thou madest all things, being well pleased
with Him, into a virgin womb; who, when He was conceived,
[page 92]
[and] made flesh, was shown to be Thy Son, being born of the
Holy Ghost and the Virgin’; who, fulfilling Thy ; will, and
preparing a holy people,” stretched forth His hands? to suffer-
ing, that He might loose from sufferings and corruption and +
death those who have hoped in thee; who when He was
betrayed to voluntary suffering that He might raise up® those
who had slipped, and find those who were lost, and give life
to the dead, and loose [the pains of] death, and rend the
bonds of the Devil, and fulfil the counsel of the Father, and
tread down Sheol, and open the way of life, and guide the
righteous to light, and fix the boundary, and lighten the dark-
ness, and nurture the babes, and reveal the resurrection ;
taking bread, gave it to His disciples, saying, Take, eat, this
is My Body which is broken for you for the forgiveness of
sins.© When ye shall do’ this, ye make’ My resurrection.
Also the cup of wine which He mixed He gave for a type of
the Blood which he shed for us.

And also let him say :

Remembering § therefore Thy death and resurrection, we
offer to Thee bread and the cup, giving thanks to Thee who
alone art God for ever, and our Saviour, since® Thou hast
promised ” to us to stand before Thee and to serve Thee in
priesthood. } , Therefore we render thanks to Thee, we Thy
servants, O Lord.

And let the people say likewise.

And also let [the bishop] say :

We offer to Thee this thanksgiving, Eternal Trinity, O
1Or: a virgin. 21 St. Pet. ii. 9; Ex. xix. 6.

3 Cf. St. John xxi. 18. 4So MSS. Rahmani conjectures: of.
5 Lit.: set upright.

6 The wording differs considerably from that in the N.T. It resembles most
nearly St. Matt. xxvi. 27, 28, and 1 Cor. xi. 24, 25.

7 The Syriac does equally well for ‘‘ offer” in both cases. Cf. 1 Cor. xi. 26.
8 Or: commemorating.

9 ed’ dca literally translated into Syriac.

1 Rahmani conjectures: hast made us worthy, by omitting two letters in the
Syriac.
[page 93]
Lord Jesus Christ, O Lord the Father before! whom all
creation and every nature trembleth fleeing into itself, O Lord
the Holy Ghost; we have brought? this drink and this food
of Thy Holiness [to Thee]; Cause that it may be to us not
for condemnation, not for reproach, not* for destruction, but
for the medicine and support of our spirit. Yea, O God,
grant us that by Thy Name every thought of things dis-
pleasing to Thee may flee away. Grant, O God, that every
proud conception may be driven away from us by Thy Name
which is written within the veils* of Thy sanctuaries, those
high ones—a Name which, when Sheol heareth [it], it is
amazed, the depth is rent, the spirits are driven away, the
dragon is bruised,’ unbelief is cast out, disobedience is sub-
dued, anger is appeased, envy worketh not, pride is reproved,
avarice rooted out, boasting taken away, arrogance humbled,
[and] every root of bitterness® destroyed. Grant therefore,
O Lord, to our innermost eyes to see Thee, praising Thee and
glorifying Thee, commemorating’ Thee [and] serving Thee,
having a portion in Thee alone, O Son and Word of God,
who subduest® all things. Sustain unto the end those
who have® gifts of revelations¢ Confirm those who have ®
a gift of healing! Make those courageous who have? the
power of tongues." Keep those who have? the word of doctrine®
upright. Care for those who do Thy will alway.1* Visit the
widows. Help the orphans. Remember those who have
fallen asleep in the faith. And grant us an inheritance with
[page 94]
Thy saints, and bestow [upon us] the power to please Thee
as they also pleased Thee. Feed the people in uprightness :
sanctify us all, O God; but grant that all those who partake
and receive of Thy Holy Things may be made one with Thee,
so that they may be filled with the Holy Ghost, for the
confirmation of the faith in truth, that they may lift up
always a doxology to Thee, and to Thy beloved Son Jesus
Christ, by whom praise and might [be] unto Thee, with Thy
Holy Spirit for ever and ever.

Let the people say: Amen.*

The deacon: Karnestly let us beseech our Lord and our
God that He may bestow upon us concord ® of spirit.*

The bishop: Give us concord® in the Holy Spirit, and
heal our souls by this offering, that we may live in Thee in
all the ages of ages.

The people: Amen.

Let the people also pray in the same [words].

After these things the seal of thanksgiving thus: Let the
Name of the Lord be blessed for ever.

The people: Amen.

The priest: Blessed is He that hath come® in the Name
of the Lord.® Blessed [is] the Name of His praise.

And let all the people say: So be it, so be it.

Let the bishop say: Send the grace of the Spirit upon us.
[page 95]
If the bishop be polluted, let him not offer, but let a?
presbyter offer. Also let him not receive of the mystery,® not
as though he were defiled, but because of the honour of the altar.
But after he hath fasted and bathed in pure water, let him
approach and minister. Similarly also a presbyter. And wf
also a widow be menstruous, let her not approach. Similarly
if a woman or a layman or any of the company [of the clergy
be polluted), let him not approach, for the honour [of the altar]
except after fasting and bathing.*

Let the priests first receive, thus: the bishops, presbyters,
deacons, widows, readers, subdeacons. After these those that
have gifts, those newly baptized, babes.® The people thus: old
men, virgins® and the rest. The women [thus]: deaconesses,
and after that the rest.

Let each one when he receiveth the thanksgiving" say before
he partaketh: Amen. After that let him pray thus ; after that ®
he receiveth the Eucharist® let him say: Holy, Holy, Holy,
Trinity ineffable, grant me to receive unto life’ this Body,
{and] not unto condemnation. And grant me to bring forth
the fruits that are pleasing to Thee, so that when I shall be
shown to be pleasing to Thee I may live in Thee, doing Thy
commandments ; and [that] with boldness I may call Thee
Father, when I call for Thy kingdom and Thy will [to come]
to me.” -May Thy Name be hallowed! in me, O Lord; for
Thou art mighty and [to be] praised, and to Thee be praise
for ever and ever. Amen.

After the prayer let him receive.
[page 96]

When he taketh of the Cup, let him say twice Amen,’ for a
complete symbol? of the Body and Blood.

After all receive, let them pray, giving and rendering thanks
Sor the reception, the deacon saying :

Let us give thanks unto the Lord, receiving His Holy
Things, so that the reception [of them] may be for the life
and salvation of our souls. Let us beg and beseech [His
grace], raising a doxology to the Lord our God.

After that let the bishop [say]:

O Lord, Giver of light eternal,’ the Helmsman of souls,
the Guide of saints ; Give us understanding eyes which always
look to Thee, and ears which hear Thee only, so that our soul
may be filled with grace. Create * in us a clean heart,’ O
God; so that we may alway comprehend Thy greatness. O°
God, Wonderful, who lovest man,’ make our souls better, and,
by this Eucharist ® which we, Thy servants, who fail in much,®
have [now] received, form our thoughts so that they shall not
swerve: for Thy kingdom is blessed, O Lord God, [who art]
glorified and praised in Father and in Son and in Holy
Ghost, both before the worlds, and now, and alway, and for
the ages and for ever and ever without end.

The people: Amen.

CHAPTER 24

Lf the priest consecrate oil for the healing of those who
[page 97]
suffer, let him say thus, quietly placing the vessel before the
altar :

O Lord God, who hast bestowed upon us the Spirit, the
Paraclete? the Lord,? the saving and unshaken Name, which
is hidden from the foolish but revealed unto the wise*; O
Christ, who didst sanctify us, and by Thy mercies dost make
the servants whom Thou choosest wise with the wisdom that
is Thine, who didst send the knowledge of Thy Spirit to us
sinners by the holiness which is Thine, bestowing on us the
power of the Spirit ; who art the Healer of every sickness and
of every suffering®; who didst give the gift of healing® to
those who were counted worthy of this by Thee; send on
this oil, which is the type of Thy fatness, the delivering
[power] of Thy good compassion, that it may deliver those
who labour and heal those who are sick, and sanctify those
who return, when they approach to Thy faith ; for Thou art
mighty and [to be] praised for ever and ever.

The people: Amen.

CHAPTER 25

Likewise, the same also over water.

CHAPTER 26

At early dawn let the bishop assemble the people, so that
the service may be finished before the rising of the sun.7

When he saith the First Hymn of Praise, of the Dawn, the
presbyters and deacons and the rest, the faithful also, [standing]
close by, let him say thus:
[page 98]

Praise to the Lord.

And let the people say: It is meet and right.

HYMN OF PRAISE FOR THE DAWN

The bishop: It is meet and right that we should praise
and laud and give thanks to Thee, who didst make all,
ineffable God. Stretching forth! our souls upward, we raise
to Thee, O Lord, a hymn of praise for the morning,—to Thee
who art all-wise, powerful, great in mercies, O God, the Con-
firmer and Raiser-up of our souls ; we praise Thee, the Word
who before the worlds wast begotten of the Father, and
restest alone with Thy saints? who art praised with the
hymns of the archangels——Thee the Maker, who wast not
made with hands, and who makest known holy things
which are invisible, pure, and spotless——Thee who hast made
known to us the hidden mysteries? of wisdom, and didst
promise to us immortal light; we lift up praise to Thee in
pure holiness, we Thy servants, O Lord.

And let the people say: We praise Thee, we bless Thee,
we give thanks to Thee, O Lord; and we beseech Thee, O
our God.

Also [let] the bishop say: O God, the Begetter of light,
the Principle* of life, the Giver of knowledge, the Gift of
grace, the Maker of souls, who makest things [that are]
beautiful, the Giver of the Holy Ghost, the Treasure of
Wisdom, and the Maker of good things, the Lord, the Teacher
of holiness, who rulest® the worlds by Thy will, the Receiver
of pure prayers; we praise Thee, the Only-begotten Son, the
First-born and Word of the Father, who didst bestow all Thy
[page 99]
grace on us who call upon Thee, the Helper, and upon the
Father who begat Thee; who hast an essence that cannot be
injured, where neither moth nor worm?! doth corrupt?; who
givest to all that with all their heart trust in Thee those
things which the angels have desired to behold ;3 who art the
Guardian of light eternal and [of] treasures incorruptible ; who
hast by the will of Thy Father shed light on the darkness
which [is] in us; who from the depth hast raised us up to
light; who hast given us life out of* death, and bestowed
upon us freedom out of * slavery ; who by the cross hast made
us of the household of ° Thy Father, and by Thy gospel hast
guided us to the heights of heaven, and hast comforted us by
Thy prophets; who in Thine own Person hast made us of
the household of God the Father of lights®; grant us, O
Lord, that we may praise Thee, our God, so that always with
unceasing thanksgiving’ we may speak praises to Thee, we
Thy servants, O Lord.

The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give
thanks to Thee, we beseech Thee, O our God.

Let the bishop also say: We sing to Thee with our
mouths this triple hymn of praise as a figure of Thy kingdom,
O Son of God, who [art] by § eternity; who [art] above all, with
the Father ; whom all creation praiseth, trembling with fear
of Thy Spirit; at whom all nature trembleth in fear and
[whom] every soul of the righteous blesseth; with whom
all we have taken refuge; who hast made confusion, storms,
[and] wind to cease from us; who hast been to us an haven
of rest,® and a place to flee unto from corruption; in whom
we have hope of eternal salvation; who makest the peace-
fulness of fine weather 1° for those who are buffeted on the
seas and with the tempests; who in sicknesses! art
1 Not rust. See Thes. Syr. 180. 2 St. Matt. vi. 19, almost exactly.
31 St. Pet. i. 12. 4 Lit.: from. 5 Or: brought us home to.

6 St. Jas. i. 17. 7B: thanksgivings.

* Or: through (the preposition is causal, not temporal).

® Lit.: rests. 0 Cf. Ps, evii. 29 sqq. 1 B.: sickness,
[page 100]
entreated and healest without price; who art with those that
are shut up in prison; who hast loosed us from the bonds of
death ; [who art] the Comforter of the poor, and of those who
mourn, and of those who have laboured and wearied them-
selves with the cross; who turnest away from us every
menace!; who for us hast reproved the craft of Satan; who
drivest away his menaces,? and givest us courage; who
thrustest away all error from those that trust in Thee; whom
the prophets and apostles praised secretly: we praise Thee,
O Lord, we lift up to Thee a doxology, so that, having known
Thee, we may rest in the habitations of life, doing Thy will
alway. And grant to us, O Lord, to walk according to Thy
commandments, and in mercy visit us all, both small and
great, the prince and his people, the shepherd and his flock ;
for Thou, O Lord, art our God, and blessed and praised [is]
Thy kingdom—T|the kingdom] of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, both before the worlds, and now and
always, and for the ages, and for ever and ever without end.
And let the people say: Amen.

Let them sing psalms and four hymns of praise ; one? by
Moses, and of Solomon, and of the other prophets. Thus: little
singing-boys* ; two virgins®; three deacons ; three presbyters.
And so let the hymn of praise be said by the bishop, or by one
of the presbyters.
Let wt be said thus: The grace of our Lord [be] with you all.
And let the people say: And with thy spirit.
And let the priest say: Also let us praise our Lord.
[page 101]
And let the people say: Meetly and rightly.
Let the priest say: Let your hearts be fixed.
And let the people say: We have [them fixed] with the Lord.
HYMN OF PRAISE OF THE SEAL!

O Lord, the Father, the Giver of light, the Author of all
power and of all spirits, the Sealer of eternal light, and the
Guide of life, the Maker of felicity and immortality, who hast
made us to pass through material darkness, and hast bestowed
upon us? immaterial light; who hast loosed the bonds of dis-
obedience and crowned us with the faith which is Thine; who
dost not keep far off from Thy servants, but art in them
always ; who dost not neglect those [souls] which with labour
and in Thy fear beseech Thee; who knowest all things before
they are thought,3 and searchest out all things before they are
considered,* and givest what Thou wilt give before we ask
Thee*®; who art well pleased to hear’ those who with heart
undoubting serve Thee, O King of the highest lights and the
soldiery ® of heaven, who hearest the archangels when they
praise Thee,® and art pleased in them; Answer us, O Lord, we
beseech Thee. Grant us with boldness [with] unceasing voice
to praise Thee, to laud Thee, to lift up to Thee a doxology ;
so that being guarded by Thee and guided in light, we Thy
servants, O Lord, may constantly praise Thee.

The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give
thanks to Thee, O Lord; and we beseech Thee, O our God.
The priest: O Lord Jesus, hear us, O Holy One, who
[page 102]
wast the Voice of the dumb and the irrational, the Strength
of the paralysed, the Giver of light to the blind, the Guide of
the lame, the Cleanser of the lepers, the Curer of material
fluxes, the Healer of the deaf and dumb, the Reprover of
death, the Tormentor of darkness, the Ray of light, and the
Lamp that is not quenched,! the Sun that is not darkened *
[and] resteth [not]; but who always givest light unto* Thy
saints; who hast established all things together for the good
likeness * of comeliness ; who art the well-tempered Reason ;
who hast plainly given light to all; who art the Saviour of
the sons of men,* and the Converter of souls; who art the
Provider of all things as is right, the Maker of the angels, who
adornest all; the Thought of the Father; who didst found
the worlds in prudence and wisdom, and didst establish them
together; and wast sent from Thy eternal Father unto us ;
the Intelligence of the Spirit who may not be apprehended or
understood, the Maker-known of things invisible; Thou art
glorious, and Thy Name is Wonderful.’ Therefore we also,
Thy servants, O Lord, give praise to Thee.

The people: We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we give thanks
to Thee, O Lord; we beseech Thee, O our Lord.

The priest: We sing, O holy Lord, this threefold hymn of
praise to Thee, who didst give us a faith in Thee which cannot
be loosed, whereby Thou didst make us to conquer the bonds
of death; who didst create upright minds in ® them that trust
in Thee, that they might be gods®; who by the Spirit didst
give unto us to tread under foot all the power of the enemy
that we! may not profane those things which may not be
[page 103]
profaned ; who by Thy mediation hast made friendship for us
with Thy Father. Answer us Thy servants, O Lord, [Thou]
whom without ceasing! we entreat,? who at our supplication
givest ® [us] power against the adversary; whom alway we
ask, as [it were], for the overthrow of the Evil one; Hear us,
O King Eternal; comfort the widows, help the orphans; pity
and cleanse those who are possessed with unclean spirits, give
wisdom to the unwise*; convert those who go astray; deliver
those who are in prison; guard us all, for Thou, O Lord, art
our God; blessed and glorious is Thy kingdom.

The people: Amen.

CHAPTER 27

After this let the prayer be completed, and let the reader
then read the Prophets and the rest; let the presbyter or
deacon read the Gospel; and then let the bishop or presbyter
teach those things which are convenient and profitable. After
that let there be a prayer, and let the catechumens receive a
laying on of the hand.

CHAPTER 28

After that let the bishop teach the mysteries® to the
people. But if he be not present,® let a? presbyter speak so
that the faithful may know to whom they are approaching
and who is their’ God and Father. Then let the teaching ®
of the mysteries be said thus:
[page 104]
and is, and cometh!; who suffered and was buried,? and rose,
and was glorified by the Father; who loosed our cords from
death, who rose from the dead; who is not only Man ® but
therewith also God; who by the Holy Ghost restored the
flesh of Adam with [his] soul to immortality, because He
preserved * Adam by the Spirit®; who clothed Himself with
dead ® Adam and made him to live; who ascended into heaven ;
under whom, after the cross,’ Death fell, and® was conquered,
when its bonds, whereby the Devil sometimes® waxed strong
and prevailed against us, were dissolved ; [and] through whose
passion [Death] was manifested useless and weak when [Jesus]
cut his cords and his power, when his snares were cut, and He
struck him on his face, [even Death] who was filled with dark-
ness and was shaken, and feared, beholding the Only-begotten
Son; who in His [human] soul" descended in the Godhead
into Sheol ?#; who descended from the pure heights above the
heavens; Him [we confess] the indivisible Thought who is
from the Father, and [is] of one will with Him; Him the
Maker, with His Father, of heaven; who is the Angels’ Crown,
the Archangels’ Strength, the Raiment of the Hosts and the
Spirit of the Dominions; Him, the Ruler of the everlasting
Kingdom, and Prince of the Saints, the unfathomable Intelli-
gence of the Father; Him who is the Wisdom, the Power,
the Lord, the Thought, Intelligence, Hand, Arm™ of the
Father.

As we believe, we confess Him who is our Light, Salva-
tion, Saviour, Protector, Helper, Teacher, Deliverer, Rewarder,
Assister, Strength, Wall; our Shepherd, Entrance, Door, Way,
[page 105]
Life, Medicine, Provision, Drink, [and] Judge. We confess
Him passible [yet] not passible, Son? [yet] not created,’ dead
[yet] alive, the Son of the Father, incomprehensible [yet] com-
prehensible; who, [Himself] sinless, hath borne® our sins
when He left the Father’s heaven; whose Body being broken
becometh our salvation, and [His] Blood and Spirit [our] life
and holiness, and the water * our cleansing ; who giveth light *
to the hearts of those who fear Him, being with them in all
things; who hath made us strangers to the whole way of the
Devil; the Renewer of souls, in whom we all have put our
trust.

He, being God, and before the worlds with® the Father,
eternal God,° when He saw the world perishing in the bonds
of sin, and trodden down by the power of a crafty wild beast,
and made subject to death through ignorance and error, deter-
mining to heal the race of mankind, came to a virgin womb,
though hidden from all the camps of the heavenly ones, and
cast into ignorance [the] opposing hosts. But when [He], the
Incorruptible, clothed Himself with corruptible fiesh, making
flesh which was under death to be incorruptible, He thus
showed in the flesh of dead Adam, wherewith He clothed
Himself, an example’ of incorruptibility, by which example?
the things of corruption were abolished.

He delivered indeed holy commandments through the
Gospel, which is the fore-proclaiming of the kingdom; by
which Gospel as® a figure of the kingdom we learned to
live®; through which Gospel the bonds of the Devil have
been cut, so that we may attain? immortality instead of 1
death, and instead of ™ ignorance may receive [the grace] of
watchfulness.

He, then, having become Man,! the Son of God, the Lord,
who took [on Him] the dead race of Adam in all its kinds,
by emptying [Himself !*], He who is the First, came to birth,
[page 106]
as Man,! though He is God; He who was foreknown by the
prophets,” and preached by the apostles, and lauded by angels,
and glorified by the Father of all’ He was crucified for us;
and His cross is our life, our strength, [our] salvation, for it
is the hidden mystery,‘ the ineffable joy, and through it the
whole nature of mankind, always bearing it, is made insepar-
able from God, for it is the virtue® benign’ and inseparable &
from God, that cannot be spoken as is meet by these lips,
[and] that was hidden from the beginning; but now the
mystery which is revealed, which is for the faithful, shall be,
not as it seemeth to be, but as it is.

This cross in which we boast, so that we may be glori-
fied, [and] the bearers whereof, the faithful and perfect,
separate their souls from everything that can be felt, from
everything that is seen, as from a thing which is not true?
—by this ask for yourselves, O ye who quit you like men’;
make deaf your visible ears"; make blind your bodily ¥ eyes ;
so that ye may know the will of Christ and all the mystery
of your salvation. Holy men? and women, whose property
it is to make your boast in the Lord, listen to the inward
man.!*

Our Lord, when He taught us and appointed to us a
covenant, and made us of [His] household, and came, after
His passion, into Sheol, made captive all the earth—He who
made the nature of death captive to life, and Death when it
saw Him descending in His soul’® to Sheol, was deceived, and
hoped that He was food for him, as was his custom. But
when he saw in Him the beauty of the Godhead, he cried out
with [his] voice, saying: Who is this that hath clothed
Himself with Man who [was] under me, and hath conquered
[page 107]
me? Who is this that snatcheth from destruction flesh
which was bound by me? Who is this! that hath clothed
Himself with earth but [Himself] is heaven? Who is this
that was born in corruptibility, but suffereth no corruption ??
Who is this [that is] a stranger to my laws? Who is this
that maketh captive those that are mine? Who is this that
striveth with the power of burning Death,® and conquereth
darkness? What is this new glory which [is] in this vision
that preventeth me from doing the things which I would?
Who is this new dead One without sin? Who is this that
by the abundance of light extinguisheth darkness, and doth
not allow* me to have rule over those that are mine, but
draweth to heaven the souls which were given unto me?
What is this glory which preventeth the body from being
corruptible? Who is this whom I cannot touch®? What is
this glory unsearchable ® to its surroundings? Woe’ isme! I
am put to flight’® by Him and by those things which are His,
for I cannot ® injure them.

He, being the Christ, who was crucified, by whom the
[things] that were on the left hand were’ [placed] on the
right hand, and those which were beneath [were] as those which
[were] above, and those which [were] behind as those which
{were] before, when He rose from the dead, and trod down
Sheol, and by death slew Death"; after 12 He rose on the third
day He gave thanks to the Father, saying: I give thanks to
Thee, O My Father, not with these lips which are fixed
together, nor yet with a corporeal tongue through which truth
and lying go out, nor with this created and material
word *; but I give thanks to Thee, the King, with that Voice
which through Thee understandeth all [things], which cometh
not by a bodily organ, which falleth not on carnal ears, which
[page 108]
is not in the world and is not left on earth, but with this
Voice, the Spirit who! is in Us, only speaking to Thee, O
Father, loving Thee, praising Thee, through whom? also the
whole choir of perfect saints calleth Thee beloved, [calleth]
Thee Father,? [calleth] Thee Sustainer, [calleth] Thee Helper ;
for Thou art all, and all [are] in Thee; for whatever is, is
Thine and not another’s, but is Thine alone, who art for ever
and ever. Amen:

Let the shepherd know the mysteries * of all* nature.

After I have prayed to the Father, as ye know and see,
I am taken up, saith Jesus.

Therefore it is right that the shepherd should speak
the teaching of the Initiation into the mysteries, so that
they may know of whom in the holy things they are par-
taking, and what® memorial they are making’ through the
Eucharist.®

And at the end, after this, let him say thus: As then
we also have taken refuge in Him, and have learnt that it is
in Him alone to give, let us beg from Him those things which
He said that He would give® us, which eye hath not seen and
ear hath not heard, and [which] have not entered” into the
heart of man," the things which God hath prepared for them
that love Him,!? as Moses ® and some of the saints have said.
As then we have hoped in Him, let us give to Him praise;
and to Him be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.
Let the people say: Amen.
[page 109]

After the people are taught the Initiation’ into the
mysteries, let the Eucharist be offered ; but let not the
Initiation into the mysteries be said each time, but only at
Pascha,? on Saturday, and on the first day of the week, and
on the days of the Epiphany and of Pentecost.

CHAPTER 29

OF WHAT SORT A PRESBYTER OUGHT TO BE

Let a presbyter be ordained}? being testified to by all the
people, according to what has been said before *; skilled in
reading, meek, poor? not money-loving,® having laboured
much in ministrations among the weak, proved to be pure,
without blame; if he have been as a father to the orphans, if
he have ministered to the poor; if he have not grown cold
[in his love] for the Church’; if* in all things he be pious,
quiet, so that being [thus] he may in all respects be worthy
to have those things that are fitting and suitable revealed to
him by God, and also may be counted worthy of the gift of
healing.

CHAPTER 30

Then let the appointment ® of the presbyter be thus. All the
priestly company conducting him, the bishop laying his hand on
his head, the presbyters touching him and holding him, let the
bishop begin, and say thus:
[page 110]

PRAYER OF ORDINATION! OF A PRESBYTER

O God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the In-
effable One, the Light,? who hast neither beginning nor ending,’
the Lord, who hast ordered‘ all things, and set bounds to
{them *], and by reason hast defined the order of all things by
Thee created; Hear us, and look upon this Thy servant, and
make him partaker of, and grant unto him, the Spirit ® of
grace and of reason and of strength, the Spirit® of the
presbyterate 7 who doth not grow old,’ and is indissoluble,
homogeneous loving the faithful, rebuking, that he may help
and govern Thy people by labour, by fear, by a pure heart,
by holiness, by excellency, by wisdom, and by the working of
the Holy Spirit, through Thy care, O Lord. In like manner
as when Thou didst look upon Thy People, the Chosen, Thou
didst command Moses® to ask for the elders? and filling
[them] with Thy Spirit didst bestow Him on Thy minister!
so now, O Lord, bestow on [this man] abundantly 7% Thy
Spirit, whom Thou didst give to those who by Thyself were
made disciples, and to all those who through them truly
believed in Thee* And make him worthy, being filled with
Thy wisdom and Thy hidden mysteries, to feed * Thy people
in holiness of heart: pure, and true; praising, blessing, laud-
ing, giving thanks, offering a doxology alway, day and night,
to Thy holy and glorious Name; labouring with cheerfulness
and patience to be a vessel of Thy Holy Spirit; having and
bearing alway the cross of Thy Only-begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, through whom [be] praise and might to Thee
with the Holy Ghost for ever and ever.
[page 111]

Let the people say: Amen.

Let both the priests and people give him the Peace, with an
holy kiss.

CHAPTER 31

After he is [ordained] let him be constant at the altar,
making prayers laboriously without ceasing. But sometimes
alone in some house let him take a rest from the things
which belong to? the house of the Lord; but not ceasing, or
diminishing [one] hour, from prayers.

Let him fast three days each [week ?] all the year, [on
the] one [hand] that he may be perfected in intelligence ; and
moreover [let him fast] according to his strength, not wander-
ing about and going hither and thither with every spirit, but
doing everything with energy.

If it be revealed to a presbyter or bishop to speak, let
him speak; but if not, let him not neglect and despise his
work,

Tf it be revealed to a presbyter to visit his parishes? and
speak the word, let him go; but if not, let him entreat God *
with supplication ; and if it be revealed to him to speak to
them, let him speak to them, always taking the burden and
load of Him who was crucified for him, and praying for all
the people.

Let not a presbyter or bishop be anxious about food or
raiment.® God taketh thought and careth for His own in
the [things ®] which He knoweth. But if, when he receiveth
from any one food or clothing,’ it be said to him that he
should receive also from another, let it suffice him to receive
from [the first] alone, and that [only] in so far as is fitting,
and as he needeth, and not to excess.

In respect of firmness of faith, let a presbyter always be
unchangeable; for it is such as these that God desireth ;
[page 112]
and let him prove the heart of each one; lest evil) kept
and buried within, make him a stranger to the grace
of God.

Let him not allow tares to grow in the good wheat, but
let him take them away from it, and cut off, those who bring
[them] into it. Let not darkness cover his light. Let him
teach all the faithful at all times that they accomplish their
course, as it were, in the day ?; because the children of light
walk not in darkness. Let the teaching of the presbyter
be fitting, and quiet and moderate, coupled? with fear and
trembling ; and that of the bishop also in like manner. And
in teaching let them not speak vain things; but let him say
such things as the hearers when they hear may keep [in
memory]. Let the presbyter be mindful of all the things that
he teacheth. For in the day of the Lord the Word, it will be®
demanded [of him] that he should testify to the people the
things which he spake, so that those who did not hear® may
be reproved. For he must’ stand before the glory of God?
speaking those things which he hath taught. Thus, then,
let him teach, that he perish not. Let him pray for those
who hear, that the Lord may give them understanding of the
Spirit, of knowledge, of truth; and let him not vainly cast
pearls before swine; but let him search out [those] who are
worthy, those who have heard and have performed"; lest
if the Word have not brought forth fruit in them, but have
perished, he himself should prove the cause ™ of its perishing.
Let him not give the holy things to dogs. Let him discern
the signs of those who hear the word and bring forth good
fruits. But in all things let him, without anxiety, keep [the
matter] for the bishop.

Let him not neglect nor despise those who do good works ¥
[page 113]
through teaching! But let him watch for signs in them;
[and] of those [signs appearing] in them let him judge
spiritually 2 by [their] sighs, weeping, earnest conversations,
silence, sadness, patience, humble bowing of the head.? But
that which best traineth and causeth suffering is weeping
and groaning.

But the work [these do] is watching, continence, fasting,
quietness, unceasing prayer, meditation, faith, meekness,
philanthropy, labour, weariness, love, subjection, goodness,
gravity, and every [work of] light.®

[On the other hand], the signs of those who do not bring
forth the fruits of life are [these]:—-sloth, love of pleasure,
eyes wandering in all directions, disobedience, complaining,
restlessness,® a laziness’ that will not move,’ wandering
about.

But the work [these do] is gluttony, debauchery, anger,
unbelief, idle and unseasonable laughter, confusion, neglect,
error, disturbance, wantonness, love of gains, love of money,
envy, contention, drunkenness, high-mindedness,? vain talking,
love of praise, and every [work of] darkness.

Let him recognise products such as these, and let him
speak to those who are worthy. But let him not waste time!
upon those who do not receive [his teaching]. For those
who sow on earth without fruits shall reap miseries.

Let * the presbyter, as is right and fitting, go about to the
houses of those who are sick with the deacon, and visit
them; let him consider and say to them those things that are
fitting and proper, especially to the faithful. Let him exhort
that the sick who are poor be helped by the Church, so that
they also who do [deeds] of kindness may enter into the joy
[page 114]
of their Lord+ Let? him confirm those who have newly
become catechumens* with prophetical and evangelical utter-
ances, with the word of teaching. Let him not neglect his
prayers, for he is the figure of the archangels: but let him
know that God did not spare the angels who sinned.*

Let him fast; and if it is proper, let him receive of the
cup. Let wine suffice him, as much as, in his judgment,
profiteth and helpeth him, lest that drink which was for [his]
healing he receive to [his] loss) In sickness, let him eat
herbs and fish,> and also that he may have care for his work.
In everything let the priest be an example ® to the faithful of
the work of holiness.’

Let the presbyter praise and give thanks in the same way
as the bishop.

CHAPTER 32

Let them say the daily hymn of praise in the Church, each
of them at his own time, thus:

DAILY HYMN OF PRAISE

The grace of our Lord [be] with you all.

The people: And with thy spirit.

The priest: Praise ye the Lord.

The people: It is meet and right.

The priest: Thee, O Father of incorruptibility, Deliverer
of our souls, Confirmer of the thoughts, and Guardian of our
hearts, who hast illumined our hearts and hast brought to an
end the darkness of our intelligence, by the knowledge which
is in Thee; who hast by the cross of Thy Only - begotten
brought back anew® to incorruptibility the old man® which
[page 115]
end, and by Thy commandments hast made man?‘ to pass to
immortality ; who didst seek that which was lost, we [Thy]
servants [and] also [Thy] people praise.

The people: We praise Thee, and the rest.

The priest: We praise Thee, O Lord, whom continually
the unceasing doxologies of the Archangels singing praise,
and the hymns of praise? of Glories? and chants of Dominions
praise. We praise Thee, O Lord, who didst send Thy Thought,
Thy Word, Thy Wisdom, Thy Energy,’ [namely] Him who
[is] of old, and was with Thee before the worlds, the uncreated
Word of the Unereated one, but appeared, incarnate, in the end
of times, for the salvation of created * man,5 Thy beloved Son
Jesus Christ, who made us free from the yoke of slavery.
Therefore we also, as we are accustomed, [we] Thy servants,
O Lord [and] also [thy] people, praise Thee.

The people: We praise Thee, and the rest.

The priest: We sing to Thee a triple hymn of praise from
our hearts, O Lord who givest life, to Thee who dost visit
the souls of the poor, and neglectest not the spirits of those
who are afflicted, the Assister of those who are persecuted,
the Helper of those who are tossed on the sea, the Deliverer
of those who are buffeted, the Provider for those who are
hungry, who takest vengeance for those who are wronged,
the Lover of the faithful, the Companion of the saints,
the Habitation of the pure, the Dwelling-place of those
who call on Thee in truth, the Protector of widows, the
Liberator of orphans, who givest to Thy Church a right
government, and hast founded® in it love-feasts, ministra-
tions, receptions’ of the faithful, the partaking of the Spirit,
gifts of grace and powers. We praise Thee; we cease not
alway in our hearts picturing the image of* Thy kingdom
in ourselves, for Thy sake [and] also [for the sake] of Thy
beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom [be] praise and might to
Thee with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever, Amen.

And let the people say: Amen.
[page 116]

But if also any one saith prophetical words, let him say
[them]; he hath a reward.

But at midnight let the sons of priestly service, and those
of the people who are more perfect, give praise by themselves.
For also in that hour our Lord, rising, praised His Father.

See, O Children of the light; he who believeth the words
of the Lord, walketh as He walked in this world, that where
He is, there he may be also.

CHAPTER 332

OF DEACONS

The deacon is appointed,®? chosen like the things which
have before been spoken of. If he be of good conduct,’ if
he be® pure, if he have been chosen for purity and for ab-
stinence from distractions*; if not, yet [if he] be the husband
of one wife,’ borne® witness to by all the faithful, not en-
tangled® in the businesses of the world, not knowing a
handicraft, without riches, without children.! But if he be
married 1° or! have children,! let his children} be taught to
work piety 1? and to be pure, so that they may be approved
by the Church,’8 according to the rule of the ministry. But
let the Church take care for them, so that they may per-
severe in the law and in the work of the ministry.

CHAPTER 34 14

But let him accomplish in the Church those things which
are right. Let [his] ministry be thus. First, let him do
[page 117]
only those things which are commanded by the bishop as for
proclamation!; and let him be the counsellor of the whole
clergy? and the mystery* of the Church; who ministereth
to the sick, who ministereth to the strangers, who helpeth
the widows, who is the father of the orphans, who goeth
about all the houses of those that are in need, lest any be
in affliction or sickness or misery. Let him go about in the
houses of the catechumens, so that he may confirm those
who are doubting and teach those who are unlearned.*

Let him clothe those men® who have departed,’ adorning
[them]; burying’ the strangers; guiding those who pass
from their dwelling, or go into captivity. For the help ® of
those who are in need let him notify the Church; let him
not trouble the bishop; but only on the first day of the week
let him make mention about everything, so that he may
know.

Let him be watchful at the hour of the assembly, going
about in the church, and let him see that no one be [ there
who is] proud, or® a buffoon, or a spy,’® or one who speaketh
idle [words]. Let him rebuke [such], every one seeing and
hearing, and let him thrust out him whom he hath con-
demued # to receive punishment, so that the others also may
fear. And if [the offender] persuade him to permit him to
partake, let him give? him comfort. But if the man persist
in his transgression or disorderliness, let him take [word]
about him up to the bishop, and let him be separated seven
days, and then called; so that he be not taken captive.”
But if when he cometh he still continue and persist in his
folly, let him be cut off until he, repenting truly, come to
himself, beseeching [to be received back,

If he be in a city on the seashore, let him go quickly
[page 118]
about the places on the seashore, lest} there be any one
dead in the sea*; let him clothe him and bury him. Similarly
also let him search out the guest house,’ lest there be any
one who is staying in the place sick or in need or dead; and
let him make [it] known to the Church, so that it may
provide what is right for each one. Let him cause the
palsied and infirm to bathe‘ as is right, so that they may
have a breathing space from their pains. Let him give
through the Church to each one what is right.®

In the Church let twelve presbyters, seven deacons, four-
teen subdeacons, thirteen widows who sit in front,’ be known.®
But of the deacons let him who is considered among them
to be most earnest, and best in governing, be chosen to be
the receiver of strangers. Let him alway be in the place ®
of the guest house which is in the church, clothed in white
garments, a stole only on his shoulder.

CHAPTER 35

Let him be in everything as the eye of the Church, with
fear admonishing," so that he may be an example to! the
people of piety Let him admonish thus:

ADMONITION OF THE DEACON

Let us arise.

Let every one know his place.

Let the catechumens depart.

See [that] no one polluted, no one slothful [remain].

[Lift] wp the eyes of your hearts.

The angels are looking on.

See [that] he who trusteth not, withdraw.
[page 119]
Let us beseech in concord.*
Let no fornicator, no wrathful man? [remain]; if one

who is a servant of evil be [here], let him withdraw.
See, as children? of the light, let us beg [and | beseech

our Lord and our God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.
When the presbyter or bishop beyinneth the prayer, let the

people pray and kneel.*
Then let the deacon say thus:
For® the peace which is from heaven let us beseech, that

the Lord in His mercy may give us peace.
For our faith® let us beseech, that the Lord may grant

unto us to keep truly unto the end the faith which is in

Him.
For harmony and concord let us beseech, that the Lord

may keep us together in concord of the Spirit.
For patience let us beseech, that the Lord may bestow

[upon us| patience unto the end in all afflictions.
For the Apostles let us beseech, that the Lord may grant

to us to please Him, as they also pleased Him, and may make

us worthy of their inheritance.
For the holy prophets let us beseech, that the Lord may

number us with them.
For the holy confessors let us beseech, that the Lord God

may grant us to fulfil [our course] with the same mind [as

they].
For the bishop let us beseech, that our Lord may grant

him to us for length of days’ in faith, rightly dividing® the

word of truth, and standing at the head of the Church purely

and without blame.
For the presbyterate let us beseech, that the Lord may

not take away from them the spirit of the presbyterate, but

bestow on them earnestness and piety until the end.
For the deacons let us beseech, that the Lord may grant
[page 120]
unto them to run a perfect course, and to perfect holiness,
and that He may remember their work and their love.

For the presbyteresses let us beseech, that the Lord may
hear their supplications and keep their hearts perfectly in the
grace of the Spirit and help their work.

For the subdeacons, readers, deaconesses let us beseech,
that the Lord may grant to them to receive a reward in
patience.

For the faithful laymen let us beseech, that the Lord may
grant unto them to keep the faith perfectly.

For the catechumens let us beseech, that the Lord may
grant unto them to be counted worthy of the laver of forgive-
ness, and may sanctify them with the seal of holiness.

For the kingdom let us beseech, that the Lord may
bestow upon it tranquillity.

For the exalted powers let us beseech, that the Lord may
grant to them prudence and the fear of Him.

For all the world let us beseech, that the Lord may
provide for each one such things as are meet.

For those who travel by sea,? and those who go on
journeys let us beseech, that the Lord may guide them? with
the right hand of mercy.

For those who are persecuted let us beseech, that the
Lord may grant to them patience and knowledge, and may
bestow on them also a completed * labour.

For those who have fallen asleep from the Church let us
beseech, that the Lord may bestow upon them a place of rest.
For those who have fallen® let us beseech, that the Lord
may not remember their follies unto them, but moderate [His]
threats unto them.

And let us all also, who need prayer, beseech that the
Lord may protect and keep us with the® peaceful Spirit.

Let us persuade and beseech the Lord, that He may
receive our prayers.

After the deacon commemorateth, let the bishop make a sign
with his hand.
[page 121]

Let the deacon say: Let us arise in the Holy Ghost, that,
being made wise, we may grow in His grace, boasting in His
Name ; being built on the foundation of the Apostles,’ let us
beg [and] beseech the Lord that, being persuaded, He may
receive our prayers.

Then let the bishop complete [the prayer]. And let the
people say: Amen.

CHAPTER 36

Let the deacon be such as this, so that he may appear
with fear and modesty and reverence. With regard to fervour
of spirit,? let him have a perfect manner of life. Let him
observe and look at those who come into the house of the
sanctuary. Let him investigate who they are, so that he may
know if they are lambs or wolves. And when he asketh, let
him bring in him that is worthy, lest, if a spy enter, the
liberty of the Church be searched out,? and his sin be on his
head.

If* any one come late to the [service of] praise,> either
when that of the dawn® is being said or when the Offering
is being offered, whoever he be, let him remain outside, and
let not the deacon bring him in,—for it’ is a type of the day
of judgment® which is to come,—lest by the noise of the
entrance there be distraction to those who are praying. But
when he cometh and findeth that the door is shut,’ let him not
knock, because of what hath been said already.

But after the hymn of praise which is placed first is
finished, let the faithful man or faithful woman enter. Let
the deacon say, either, Over the offering®: or, For! the
[page 122]
hymn of praise, let us beseech that the Lord may write our
supplication! in the book of life, and [that] God who
[is] for ever may remember us in His holy habitations of
light. For? [this] brother who is late, let us beseech that
the Lord may give him earnestness and labour, and turn away
from him every bond ® of this world, and give him the will of
affection and love and * hope.

Similarly also® for® a sister or for® a deaconess, for ®
those who are’ late or remain® outside, let him admonish ®
that all the people may beseech for them. For thus when
a deacon mentioneth and admonisheth about them,!° earnest-
ness is strengthened and the bond of love ‘" is fulfilled, and the
despiser and the slothful is disciplined.

CHAPTER 37

If” any woman whatsoever suffer violence from a man,
let the deacon accurately investigate if she be faithful’ and
have truly suffered violence; if! he who treated her with
violence was not her lover. And if she be accurately thus,
and if she that suffered mourn about the violence that
happened to her, let him take it up to the hearing of the
bishop, that she may be shewn to be in all things in com-
munion with’ the Church. If he who treated her with
violence be faithful, let not the deacon bring him into the
church for partaking,” even if he repent. But if he be a
catechumen and repent, let him be baptized and partake.
Let the deacon catechise those who repent and bring them
to the presbyters or to the bishop that they may be catechised
and taught knowledge. But if [his] power suffice ” to accom-
[page 123]
plish perfectly the office of the diaconate, let him abide only
in prayer; and let him consider supplication and meditation,
love, the! way, mourning, and [to have] fear before his eyes,
as a work; and he shall be called a son of the light.

CHAPTER 38

Let the appointment of a deacon be thus. Let the bishop
alone lay a hand? on him, because he is not appointed to the
priesthood, but for the service of attendance on the bishop
and the Church.? Over the deacon then, let the bishop say
thus :

PRAYER OF ORDINATION* OF A DEACON

O God, who didst create all things, and didst adorn [them]
by the Word; who dost rest® in the pure ages;® who didst
minister to us eternal life by Thy prophets; who didst en-
lighten us with the light of knowledge; O God, who doest
great things,’ and [art] the Maker of all glory’ Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ,2 whom Thou didst send to minister to Thy
will,!? that all the race of mankind might be saved, and didst
make known to us and didst reveal Thy Thought, Thy Wisdom,
Thine Energy, Thy beloved Son, Jesus Christ, the Lord of
light, the Prince of princes, and God of gods; give the spirit
of grace and earnestness to" this Thy servant, that there may
be given to him earnestness, quiet, strength, power to please
Thee; give him, O Lord, as a worker in the law without shame,
kind, a lover of orphans, a lover of the pious, a lover of
widows, fervent in spirit, a lover of good things; and
[page 124]
enlighten, O Lord, him whom Thou hast loved and chosen to
minister to Thy Church, offering in holiness to Thy holy
place? those things which are offered to Thee from the
inheritance of Thy high priesthood; so that ministering
without blame and purely and holily and with a pure con-
science, he may be counted worthy of this high and exalted
office, by Thy good will, praising Thee continually through
Thy Only-begotten Son Jesus Christ,3 our Lord, by whom [be]
praise and might to Thee for ever and ever.

The people: Amen.

CHAPTER 39

[OF CONFESSORS]

If [one] be borne witness to and confess that he was in
bonds and in imprisonment and in afflictions* for the Name
of God, a hand is not therefore laid on him for the diaconate.
Similarly not for the presbyterate. For he hath the honour
of the clergy,’ having been protected by the hand of God, by
[his] confessorship. But if he be appointed bishop, he is also
counted worthy of laying on of the hand. And [even] if he be
a confessor who hath not been judged before the power, and
hath not been buffeted in bonds, but only hath confessed, he
is counted worthy of laying on of the hand. For he receiveth
the prayer of the clergy. But let him® not pray over him
repeating” all these words; but when the shepherd advanceth§
he will receive the effect.

CHAPTER 40

OF WIDOWS

Let a widow be appointed,® being chosen, if for a long
time past she have abided without a husband ; if though often
[page 125]
pressed by men! to be married? because of the faith she
have not been married.2 But if not, it is not yet right that
she should be chosen; but let her be proved for a time, if she
be pious, if having? children she have brought them up * in
holiness, if she have not taught them worldly wisdom, if she
have made them examples of the holy law and of the Church,
if she have loved and honoured strangers, if she have been
constant in prayers if she have lived meekly, if she have
cheerfully aided those who are afflicted? if it have been re-
vealed to the saints about her, if she have not neglected the
saints, if she have ministered? with all her power, if she be fit
to bear and endure the burden, being one who prayeth without
ceasing,’ being perfect in all things, being fervent in spirit,’
having the eyes of her heart opened in everything, being
alway kind, loving innocency, not possessing anything in this
world, but alway taking and bearing about the cross, crucify-
ing™ all evil, by night and by day’ abiding by the altar,
working cheerfully and secretly. If she have one or two or
three likeminded * in my Name, I am among them.“ But let
her be perfect in the Lord, as one who is visited by the Spirit.
Let her do the things which are made known to her with fear
and earnestness. Let her instruct those women who do not
obey ; let her teach those * [women] who have not learnt; let
her convert those who are foolish; let her instruct them to be
grave %; Jet her prove the deaconesses; let her make those
who enter!” to know of what sort and who they are; also let
her instruct them that they abide. To those who hear’® let
her patiently counsel those things which are proper. To
those who are disobedient after three instructions let her
not speak. Let her love those who desire to be in virginity
[page 126]
or in purity; those who oppose themselves let her correct
modestly and quietly. With every one let her be peaceful.
Let her privately shut the mouth of + those who talk much
and idly; but if they do not hear, let her take with her an
aged woman, or let her take [it] up to the hearing of the
bishop. But in the church let her be silent.2. In prayer let
her be persistent. Let her visit those [women] who are sick ;
on each first day of the week let her take with her one deacon
or two and help them? If she have any possession * let her
give® it for the poor® and the faithful.? But if she have
nothing, let her be helped by thé Church. Let her do no
secular work, as it were for a trial. But let her have these
works of the Spirit; let her continue in prayers and fasts; let
her ask for nothing deep; let her receive those things which
the Lord giveth ; let her not be anxious for [her] children °;
let her deliver them to the Church, so that they living in the
house of God may be fit for the service of the priesthood
Her requests to God will be acceptable; they are the sacrifice
and altar of God. For those ® who have ministered well shall
be praised? by the archangels. But as for them who are
dissolute and raging and drunken, and babblers and curious
and evil, that is, those who love pleasures much, the figures of
their souls, which stand before the Father of light, perish and
are carried to darkness to dwell. or their deeds which are
visible, going up before the most High, drag them easily ™ to the
pit, so that after this world is changed and passeth away the
figures of their souls may stand against them as witnesses, not
allowing them to look up. For the figure and type of every
soul standeth before God from the foundation of the world.”
Therefore let her be chosen who can go to meet the holy phials.
Of them # are the twelve presbyters who praise My Father who
is in heaven. These who receive the prayers of every holy
soul, offer [them] to the most High [as] a sweet savour.
[page 127]

CHAPTER 41

Let the appointment! be thus. As she prayeth at the
entrance of the altar? and looketh down, let the bishop say
quietly, so that the priests may hear, thus:
PRAYER OF THE INSTITUTION? OF WIDOWS WHO SIT IN FRONT
O God, the Holy One, the Most High, who seest the
[things]* that are humble,> who hast chosen the weak ® and
the mighty ;® the Honoured One who hast created? also ® those
[things] which are despised ; give, O Lord, the spirit of power
to® this Thine handmaid, and strengthen her with Thy truth,
so that doing Thy commandment and serving *° in the house of
Thy sanctuary, she may be an honoured vessel " unto Thee, and
may glorify !? [Thee] in the day 3 when Thou wilt glorify * Thy
poor, O Lord. And* grant to her power cheerfully to accom-
plish Thy teachings which Thou hast determined for a rule for
Thine handmaid. Grant to her, O Lord, the spirit of meek-
ness and of power and of patience and of kindness, so that,
bearing with ineffable joy Thy burden, she may endure labours.
Yea, O Lord God, who knowest our weakness, perfect Thine
handmaid for the praise * of Thine house; strengthen her for
edification and a good example,’ sanctify [her], make [her]
wise; comfort [her] O God; for blessed and glorious” is
Thy kingdom, O God the Father. And to Thee [be] praise,
and to Thine Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the® Holy Ghost [who is] good and adorable and
the Maker of life,” and of equal essence with Thee,” now
[page 128]
and before all the worlds and for the ages and for ever
and ever.!

The people: Amen.

CHAPTER 42

After she is [appointed] thus,? let her not be anxious
about anything, but let her remain solitary and having leisure
for supplications of piety. For the foundation of holiness
and life for a widow such as this is solitude For she hath
loved none other but the God of gods, the Father which is in
heaven. But at fixed* times let her give praise by herself, in
the night [and] at dawn. If she be menstruous let her abide 5
in the temple and not approach the altar, not that she is as
it were polluted, but that the altar® may have honour. After-
wards, when she fasteth and batheth, let her be assiduous [at
the altar]. In the days of Pentecost, let her not fast. In the
feast of Pascha, let her give of those things which she hath
to the poor, and let her bathe, and so let her pray. But when
she giveth thanks or praise, if she have friends’ like-minded
virgins, it is well that they pray with her for the sake of the
Amen. But if not, [let her pray] alone by herself, both in the
church and in the house, especially at midnight. The times
in which she should give praise are: Saturday,® the first day
of the week, either Pascha or Epiphany or Pentecost.° At
other time[s] let her give thanks meekly with psalms, with
hymns of praise, with meditations; and thus let her labour.
For the Most High will sanctify them™ and will forgive
all [their] sins, those which were before written ™ against *
them, and their error; My Father, the Heavenly One, shall
strengthen them and enlighten their faces as the faces 1 of
[page 129]
My sanctuaries ;! they shall shine? in My glory in the day of
recompense.

CHAPTER 43

Let her hymns of praise be said thus quietly :

NIGHT HYMN OF PRAISE OF WIDOWS

Holy, holy, without spot, who hast Thy dwelling in the
light, God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, God of
Enoch and David, of Elijah, of Elisha, of Moses, of Joshua,
and of the prophets and of the others who in truth preached
Thy Name, God of the Apostles, the God who hast guided all
things by Thy reason ° and hast blest them who lovingly trust
in Thee; my soul praiseth Thee * with the power of the spirit
of my power, my heart praiseth Thee, O Lord, and Thy might,
alway. Let all my power praise Thee, O Lord, for if Thou
wilt, J am Thine, O God, the God of the poor; for Thou art
the Helper of them that lack, and Thou art He that looketh
on the meek, and the Assister of the weak; assist me, O
Lord, because by Thy grace® Thou wast well pleased in me
that I should be Thine handmaid, for Thou hast bestowed
upon me a great name, that I should be called a Christian.
Thou who hast freed me from servitude that I may serve a
servitude to God, the Mighty One who [art] for ever, who seest
all, that I may praise Thee uncondemned. Yea, O Lord God,
confirm my heart in Thee until it is perfected in the Holy
Ghost. Rejuvenate us for the edification of Thy holy Church,
Son and Word and Thought of the Father, the Christ who
camest for the salvation of the race of man,®° who didst suffer
and wast buried, and didst rise, [and] also wast glorified by Him
who sent Thee, turn, help, O Lord, set upright our thoughts 7
by the strong faith of the Spirit. Glorify Thy Name in us.
1 Or: holy things. 2 Or: appear. 3 B.: reasonings.
4B. omits this clause (blank space left).

5 Or: in thy lovingkindness (so throughout).

5 Not in B. (space left) ; lit.: of sons of men. 7 Lit.: reasonings.
[page 130]
For in Thy Father and in Thee and in the Holy Ghost is our
hope for ever and ever.

With those who are with her let her say: Amen.

But let her say the hymn of praise at dawn thus:

HYMNS OF PRAISE AT DAWN OF WIDOWS WHO SIT IN FRONT
O Eternal God, Guide of our souls, Maker of light,
Treasure of life, who restest! in the praises and prayers of
the holy ones, Lover of compassion? merciful, kind, King of
all, and God, our Lord, my spirit praiseth [Thee], sending
[up] to Thee the unceasing voices of Thine handmaid, O Lord,
who beseecheth Thee that Thou mayest perfect in Thine
handmaid the spirit of reason and of piety and of right know-
ledge. I praise Thee, O Lord, who didst take away from our
poverty all disturbance and confusion (?), wrath and all con-
tention and evil habit, who didst prepare [and] change the
feelings of my understanding that I might serve Thee only,
O God; who hast adorned Thy holy Church with various
ministries, who drivest away from Thine handmaid all doubt-
fulness, fear, weakness ; and holdest the thoughts of those who
rightly serve Thee ; I praise Thee, O God, who hast enlight-
ened me with the light of Thy knowledge, through Thine
Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [be] praise
and might to Thee for ever and ever. Amen?

And with those who are with her let her say: Amen.

CHAPTER 44

OF SUBDEACONS 4

Similarly let a subdeacon be appointed ® who is chaste,* the
bishop praying over him. Let the bishop say over him on the
first day of the week, in the hearing of all the people, thus:
[page 131]
Thou, O N., minister and hear the Gospel in the fear of
God. Cultivate? holily the knowledge of thy soul; keep pure-
ness ; discipline thyself; observe and obey and hear meekly ;
neglect not prayers and? fasts, so that the Lord may give
thee rest and make thee worthy of a higher degree.®

And let all the priests say: So be it, so be it, so be it.

CHAPTER 45

OF THE READER

A reader is instituted + [who is | pure, quiet, meek,’ wise,
with much experience, learned and of much learning, with
a good memory,® vigilant, so that he may deserve a higher
degree? First let the book be given him in the sight of the
people, on the first day of the week. Buta hand is not laid
on him. But he heareth from the bishop [the following]:

Thou, O N., whom Christ hath called to be a minister’? of
His words, be careful, and strive that thou mayest appear
approved ® both in this rule and in a higher degree, even by
our Lord Jesus Christ; so that He in His everlasting habita-
tions may pay thee a good reward for these things.

And let the priests say: So be it, so be it, so be it.

CHAPTER 46 ®

OF MALE AND FEMALE VIRGINS !°

A male or female virgin is not instituted" or appointed 2
by man,” but is voluntarily separated and named [a virgin].
[page 132]
But a hand is not laid on him, as for virginity. For this
division! is of [their] own free will. But it is right for
virgins? that they be fixed and bound in the suffering of a
sound body, that they be constant in fasts and in prayers, in
weeping and in mourning daily ; but® that they alway expect
a departure from the flesh, and strive as at* the departure.
Let them not serve® raging or debauchery or drunkenness or
vain talking, or [be engaged] in worldly work or in distrac-
tion,’ but they are as one who is on’ the cross; let their
hearts be [lifted] up, with all meekness of thought and comeli-
ness, with meditation on the Holy Scriptures, with faithful
thoughts’ with kind consolations, so that when they pray
they may be answered ® concerning those things which they
ask for the faithful who wish to provide for them. Let them
not despise 1° [these things (?)], so that through them also
a portion of life may be divided to those® Let them be
confirmed in love and kindness and in true and _ perfect
grace.# Let them be constant in consolation,» consoling their
neighbours, catechising '* and teaching those who have lately
been made faithful, in! understanding and in knowledge
and in kindness, inciting * those who are very young, being ex-
amples ! of holiness among them in all good things. Similarly
also let the females do. But in order and in grace and in
knowledge let them speak and work,” that they may truly be
the salt of the earth?! as it is called. But”* let females *8
who are virgins have their heads covered in the church, and
let them hide only their hair; but let them be counted worthy
[page 133]
of honour from every one, in order that the rest [of the
women] who desire, may emulate them.

Cuarrer 47 1

OF A GIFT

If any one appear in the people to have a gift of healing
or of knowledge or of tongues,? a hand is not laid on him,
for the work is manifest. But let them have honour.
The First Book of Clement is ended.

1§, omits this chapter. 21 Cor. xii. 1-10.
[page 134]

THE SECOND BOOK OF CLEMENT

COMMANDMENTS AND RULES AND A DEFINI-
TION’ WHICH OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST
LAID DOWN FOR THE ORDER? OF THOSE
WHO ARE BAPTIZED®

CHAPTER 1

OF LAYMEN THUS:
Let those who first come‘ to hear the Word, before they
enter among® all the people, first come* to teachers® at
home,’ and let them be examined as to all the cause® [of
their coming] with all accuracy, so that their teachers may
know for what they have come, or with what will, And if
they have come with a good will and love, let them be dili-
gently taught. But let those who bring them be such as
are well on in years, faithful who are known by the Church;
and let them bear witness about them, if they are able to
hear [the word]. Also let their life and conversation be
asked about: if they be not contentious, if quiet, if meek,
not speaking vain things® or despisers or foul speakers,!° or
buffoons or leaders astray," or ridicule mongers. Also if
1 Stc, singular. Perhaps error (plural points omitted).
[page 135]
any of them have a wife or not; and if of his own free will*
he have not [a wife], let him? be instructed* carefully and
diligently and persuaded with all kindness to amend his
failings. And let the bishop provide for him in the Lord
with prophetical instructions which lead him to purity; and
if he maketh progress, also with apostolic doctrines® and
then with Gospel [doctrines] and with the perfect word of
doctrine; and if he be worthy, let him be baptized. And if
thus he be worthy of the hidden things, let him hear [them]
by himself, and also make progress in that which is
hidden.

Let there be no obstacle at all to him who desireth to
marry, so that he be not caught by the Evil One with fornica-
tion. But let him marry a Christian, a faithful [woman] of
the race of the Christians, who is able to keep her husband
in the faith; at the bidding of the bishop, he thus providing
for him.

And also let him who cometh’ be asked if he be a slave or
free®; and if the slave of one who is faithful, and if also his
master permit him, let him hear. But if his master be not faith-
ful and do not permit him, let him be persuaded to permit him.
And if [his master] say ® truly about him that he! wisheth !
to become a Christian because he hateth his masters, let him be
cast out. But if no cause be shewn of hatred of servitude,
but [if] he [really] wish to be a Christian, let him hear. But
if his master be faithful and do not bear witness to him, let
him be cast out. Similarly if [a woman] be the wife of a
man,” let the woman be taught to please her husband in the
fear of God. But if both of them desire to serve *® purity
in piety, they have “ a reward.

1 As the text is punctuated, these go with ‘‘instructed”; S. has “with the
word of instruction” in margin (first hand).

? Lit.: this one. 3 Or: made a catechumen (so often).

4 Or: advanceth (same word as at p. 105).

5 M.: doctrine. 5S. here resumes and has all the rest of §§ 1, 2.
7 Lit.; approacheth. 8 Lit.: son of the free.

9S. inserts: accusations ; or: causes. 10 M.B.; and he.
11§,: and sheweth that he wisheth. [There is a misprint in Rahmani’s
note. ]

12 Homo. 13 Or: cultivate. 448.: shall have.
[page 136]

Let him who is unmarried! not commit fornication, but
let him marry in the law. But if he desire to persevere
thus, let him abide? in the Lord.

If any one be tormented with a devil, let him not hear
the Word from a teacher until he be cleansed. For the
intelligence, when consumed? with a material spirit, doth
not receive the immaterial* and holy Word. But if he be
cleansed, let him be instructed in the Word.

CHAPTER 2

If a fornicatress,> or brothel keeper,® or a drunkard, or a
maker of idols,’ or a painter, or one engaged in shows,§ or a
charioteer,? or a wrestler,’ or one who goeth to the contest," or
a combatant [in the games], or one who teacheth wrestling,” or
a public huntsman," or a priest of idols, or a keeper of them,
be [among those that come], let him not be received.

If any such desire to become faithful, let him cease ® from
these [things]; and being in deed faithful, and being baptized,’
let him be received and let him partake. And if he do not
cease,> let him be rejected.

If any one be a teacher of boys in worldly wisdom, it is
well if he cease.5 But if he have no other craft” by which
to live, let him be excused.18
[page 137]

If any one be a soldier or in authority, let him be taught
not to oppress or to kill or to rob, or to be angry or to rage and
afflict any one. But let those rations? suffice him which are given
to him. But if they wish to be baptized in the Lord, let them
cease? from military service® or from the [post of] authority,
and if not let them not be received.

Let a catechumen or a believer of the people, if he desire
to be a soldier, either cease from his intention,‘ or if not let
him be rejected. For he hath despised God by his thought,
and leaving the things of the Spirit, he hath perfected himself
in the flesh, and hath treated the faith with contempt.

If a fornicatress or a dissolute man or a drunkard do not ®
[these things], and desire, believing, to become catechumens,’
they may [be admitted]. And if they make progress, let them
be baptized ; but if not let them be rejected.

If a concubine of a man®& be a servant, and desire to be
faithful, if she educate those who are born [of her] and she
separate from her master, or be joined’?® to him alone in
marriage, let her hear; and being baptized let her partake in
the Offering, but if not let her be rejected.

He who doeth things which may not be spoken of,” or a
diviner or a magician ® or a necromancer, these are defiled
and do not come to judgment. Let a charmer,’ or an
astrologer, or an interpreter of dreams, or a sorcerer, or one
who gathereth together the people, or a star-gazer, or a diviner
by idols, either cease,? and when he ceaseth let him be exorcised
and baptized ; or if not let him be rejected.

If a man® have a concubine, let him divorce her and
marry in the law and hear the word of instruction.1”
[page 138]

CHAPTER 3

Let him who is instructed! with all care and heareth the
perfectness? of the Gospel, be instructed not less than three
years, and if he, loving, strive to be baptized, let him [then]
be baptized. :

But if he be quiet and meek and earnest, and persevering
and abiding with him who teacheth him, with labour, with
watching, with confession,! with subjection, and with prayers,
and [if] he desire to be baptized sooner, let him be baptized.
For it is not the time that is considered,® but the will of faith.”
CHAPTER 4

Let those who are instructed, after the teacher ceaseth,
pray apart from the faithful and go out, so that the faithful
may learn,’ when the presbyter or deacon readeth the New
[Testament] or Gospels.®

Let the faithful women stand in the church by themselves
and the female catechumens by themselves apart from the
faithful [women]. But all the [women] apart from the men;
the girls also apart, each according to her order.

The men on the right and the women on the left; the
faithful virgins ! first, and the [women] who are being instructed
to virginity behind them.

After the prayer let the female catechumens give the Peace
to one another; also men" to men; also women to women.
Let every woman ™ cover her head with her hair also. Let
the women becomingly and decorously show their modesty in
their adornment, and let them not be adorned with plaited
hair ® or with [precious] stones, lest the young men who are in
the church be caught, but with modesty and knowledge. But
[page 139]
if not, let them be instructed by the widows who sit in front.
But if they rebelliously resist, let the bishop reprove them.

CHAPTER 5

After the catechumens pray, let the bishop or presbyter,
laying on them a hand, say the prayer of the laying on of the
hand of catechumens :

PRAYER OF CATECHUMENS

O God, who dost send thunderings and preparest lightnings ,
who hast founded the heaven and established! the earth, and
enlightenest the faithful and convertest them that err; who
hast quickened those who were dead and hast given hope to
those who [were] without hope, and hast freed the universe
from error by the coming down of Thy Only-begotten Son
Jesus Christ ; hear us, O Lord,? and give to these souls intelli-
gence, perfectness, undoubting faith, knowledge of the truth,
that they may be in a degree higher than this, through the
holy Name of Thee and of Thy beloved Son Jesus, our Lord,
through whom [be] praise and might to Thee with the Holy
Ghost, both now and alway and for ever and ever. Amen.
After this let them be dismissed. If any one, being a
catechumen, be apprehended for My Name and be judged
with tortures, and hasten and press forward to receive the
laver, let not the shepherd hesitate, but let him give [it] to
him. But if he suffer violence and be killed, not having
received the laver, let him not be anxious.. For, having been
baptized in his own blood, [he is] justified*

CHAPTER 6

But if they are severally chosen to receive‘ the laver, let
them be proved and investigated first,> how they have lived
[page 140]
while catechumens,’ if they have honoured widows, if they
have visited the sick, if they have walked ? in all meekness and
love,” if they were earnest in good works. But let them be
borne witness to by those who bring them.

And when they hear the Gospel, let a hand be laid on
them daily.

Let them be exorcised from that day when they are
chosen. And let them be baptized in the days of Pascha.
And when the days approach, let the bishop exorcise each one
of them separately by himself, so that he may be persuaded that
he is pure. For if there be one that is not pure, or in whom is
an unclean spirit, let him be reproved * by that unclean ® spirit.
If then any one is found under any such imagination,® let
him be removed from the midst [of them], and let him be
reproved and reproached that he hath not heard the word of
the commandments and of instruction faithfully, because the
evil and strange spirit abided in him.

Let those who are about to receive the laver be taught on
the fifth day of the last week only, to wash and bathe’ their
heads. But if any woman then ® be in the customary flux, let
her also take in addition another day, washing and bathing
beforehand.®

Let them fast both [on] the Friday and [on] the Saturday.
CHAPTER 7

On the Saturday let the bishop assemble them who receive
the laver, and let him bid them to kneel while the deacon
proclaimeth.° And when there is silence let him exorcise
[them], laying a hand on them, and saying:
[page 141]
angels who are under Thy power, God of the angels who are
under Thy might, King of glories and of dominions,’ God of
saints, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ;* who hast loosed the
souls that were bound by‘ death; who hast enlightened him
that was bound in darkness and fixed firm, by the firm-fixing ®
of the suffering of Thy Only-begotten ; who hast loosed our
cords and hast loosed every weight from [off] us; who hast
repelled from us every attack® of the Evil One; O Son and
Word of God, who hast made us immortal by Thy death ; who
hast glorified us with Thy glory; who hast loosed all the
bands of our sins by Thy passion; who hast borne the curse
of our sins by Thy cross, and by Thy resurrection hast taught
[mankind] to pass from [being] sons of men to become gods;
who hast taken on Thee our humiliation’; who hast trodden
the way to heaven for us; who hast changed us from corrup-
tion to incorruptibility §; hear me, O Lord, who cry to Thee in
pain and fear,O Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ,? before Him before whom stand the holy hosts of
archangels and of cherubim and armies without number, of
princes and of seraphim ; whose veil [is] the light, and before
whose face ™ [is] fire; the throne of whose glory is ineffable ;
the habitations of whose delights, which Thou hast prepared
for Thy saints, are ineffable, the raiments and treasures of
which are visible to Thee alone and to Thy holy angels;
before whom all things tremble, giving praise!?; whose
glance measureth the mountains, and whose Name, when
uttered, cleaveth the depths; whom the heavens which are
shut up by Thy hand, hide from view ; before whom the earth
and the depths together tremble; before whom the sea and
[page 142]
the dragons that [are] in it quake; of whom the wild beasts?
trembling, stand in awe; through whom the mountains and
the firmament? of the earth melt with fear; at whose power
the tempest of the winter quaketh and trembleth, and the
raging whirlwind keepeth its limits; because of whom the
fire of vengeance doth not overpass that which hath been
prescribed to it, but abideth when reproved by Thy command-
ment; because of whom the whole creation travaileth, groaning °
with groans, being bidden to tarry till its time; from whom
all nature and creation that opposeth itself fleeth; because of
whom the whole army of the adversary is subdued, and the
Devil is fallen, and the serpent is trodden down, and ,the
dragon is killed; because of whom the nations which have
confessed Thee are enlightened‘ and strengthened in Thee, O
Lord; because of whom life is revealed and hope confirmed,
and faith strengthened and the Gospel® preached; because of
whom corruption is brought to naught and incorruptibility
waxeth strong; through whom man °® was fashioned from the
earth, but having believed in Thee he is no longer” earth; O
Lord God Almighty, I exorcise these in the Name of Thee
and of Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ.

Drive away from the souls of these Thy servants every
disease and illness, and every stumbling block and all un-
belief, all doubt and all contempt,’ every unclean spirit that
worketh,? that is a witch, that killeth, that is under the
earth, that is fiery, dark, evil-smelling, given to witchcraft,
lascivious, loving gold, uplifted, money loving, wrathful.

Yea, O Lord God,!? overthrow from these Thy servants
who have been named in Thee the weapons of the Devil, all
magic, witchcraft, fear of idols, divination, astrology,” necro-
mancy, observation of the stars, astronomy,” pleasure of the
[page 143]
passions, love of disgraceful things, sadness, love of money,
drunkenness, fornication, adultery, lasciviousness, contumacy,
contentiousness, wrath, confusion, wickedness, evil suspicion.'
Yea, O Lord God, hear me, and breathe on these Thy servants
the spirit of tranquillity, that, being guarded by Thee, they
may bring forth in Thee fruits of faith, of virtue, of wisdom,
of purity, of self-discipline? of patience, of hope, of concord,
of modesty,’ of praise. For by® Thee they have been called
as servants, in the Name of Jesus Christ, being baptized in
the Trinity, in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost, the angels, glories, dominions, all the heavenly
army being witnesses. O Lord, the real-essence® of our life
and theirs, guard their hearts, O God, for Thou art mighty and
glorious’ for ever and ever.

And let all the people, also the priests, say: Amen, So be it,
so be it, so be it.

If any one be in the endurance of any thing, rise
suddenly while the bishop is saying [these words], and weep
or cry out, or foam [at the mouth] or gnash with his teeth,
or stare’ or be much uplifted or altogether run away, being
quickly carried off, let such an one be put aside® by the
deacons, so that there be no disturbance while the bishop
is speaking, and let such an one be exorcised by the priests
until he be cleansed, and so let him be baptized.

After the priest exorciseth those who have drawn near,
or him who is found unclean, let the priest breathe on them
and seal them between their eyes,!° on the nose, on the heart,
on the ears; and so let him raise them up.

CHAPTER 8

In the forty days of Pascha, let the people abide in the
[page 144]
temple, keeping vigil and praying, hearing the Scriptures and
hymns of praise and the books? of doctrine.

But? on the last Saturday let them rise early 4 in he
night, and ® when the catechumens are being exorcised till the
Saturday midnight.© Let those who are about to be baptized
not bring anything else with them except one loaf for the
Eucharist.’

But let them be baptized thus. When they come to the
water, let the water be pure and flowing. First the babes,
then the men, then the women.

But if any one desire to approach as it were to virginity,
let him ° first be baptized by the hand of the bishop.

Let the women, when they are baptized, loose their hair.
Let all the boys who can answer in baptism make the
responses ® and answer after the priest. But if they cannot,
let their parents make the responses for them, or some one of
their households.?°

But when they who are being baptized go down [to the
water], after they make the responses and say [the answers],
let the bishop see if! there be any of them—either a man
having a ring of gold, or a woman having on her gold; for no
one should have with him any strange thing in the water, but
let him deliver it to those who are near him.”

But when they are about to receive the oil for anointing,
let the bishop pray over it and give thanks, and let him
exorcise another [oil] with an exorcism, the same as in the
case of catechumens. And let the deacon bear that which is
exorcised, and let the presbyter stand by him. Let him then
who standeth by that [oil] on which a giving of thanks over *
the oil [is said] be on the right hand; but him who standeth
by that which is exorcised, on the left.
[page 145]

And when he taketh hold of each one, let him ask—he that
is being baptized turning to the West—and let him say: Say,
I renounce thee, Satan, and all thy service, and thy shows?
and thy pleasures? and all thy works. And when he hath
said these things and confessed, let him be anointed with that
oil which was exorcised, he who anointeth him saying thus: I
anoint [thee] with this oil of exorcism for a deliverance from
every evil and unclean spirit, and for a deliverance from
every evil. And also, turning him* to the Hast, let him® say:
[Say,*] I submit’ to Thee, Father and ® Son and® Holy Ghost,
before whom all nature trembleth and is moved. Grant me
to do all Thy will® without blame.

Then after these things let him give him over to the pres-
byter who baptizeth. And let them stand in the water naked.
But let the deacon descend with him similarly. But when he
who is being baptized goeth down into the water, let him that
baptizeth him say, putting his hand on him, thus: Dost thou
believe in God the Father Almighty? Let him that is being
baptized say: T believe. Let him immediately baptize him once.
Let the priest also say: Dost thou believe also in Christ Jesus
the Son of God, who came from the Father, who is of old
with the Father, who was born of Mary the Virgin by the
Holy Ghost, who was crucified in the days of Pontius Pilate,
and died and rose the third day,!° [who] came to life from the
dead, and ascended into heaven and sat down on the right
hand of the Father, and cometh to judge the quick and the
dead? But when he saith: I believe, let him baptize him the
second time. And also let him say: Dost thou believe also in
the Holy Ghost, in the holy Church? And let him who is
being baptized say: I believe; and thus let him baptize him the
third time.

Then when he cometh up let him be anointed by the pres-
byter with oil over which the giving of thanks has been said,
[page 146]
[the presbyter] saying over him: I anoint thee with oil in the
Name of Jesus Christ. But let women be anointed by widows
who sit in front, the presbyter saying over them [the words].
And let those widows in baptism also beneath a veil receive them
by a veil, the bishop saying those Confessions, and so those?
whom they: cause them to renounce.”

CHAPTER 9

Then let then be together in the Church, and let the bishop
lay a hand on them after baptism, saying and invoking over
them thus:

INVOCATION OF THE HOLY GHOST

O Lord God, who by Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ didst
fill Thy holy apostles with the Holy Ghost, and by the Spirit
didst permit Thy blessed prophets to speak; who didst count
these Thy servants worthy to be counted worthy in Thy
Christ * of forgiveness of sins through the laver of the second
birth,t and hast cleansed them of all the mist of error and
darkness of unbelief; make them worthy to be filled with
Thy Holy Spirit, by Thy love of man,> bestowing upon them
Thy grace, so that they may serve Thee according to Thy
will, truly, O God, and may do Thy commandments in holi-
ness, and cultivating alway those things which are of Thy
will, may enter into Thine eternal tabernacles, through Thee
and through Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, by whom [be]
to Thee praise and might with the Holy Ghost for ever
and ever.

Similarly, pouring the oil, placing a hand on his head, let
him say: Anointing I anoint [thee] in God Almighty, and in
Jesus Christ and in the Holy Ghost, that thou mayest be
His ® soldier,’ having a perfect faith, and a vessel pleasing to
Him.
[page 147]

And sealing him on his forehead, let him give him the
Peace, and say: The Lord God of the meek be with thee.
And let him who has been sealed answer and say: And with
thy spirit. And so each one severally.

CHAPTER 10

Thenceforward let them pray together with all the people.
Let the oblation be offered by the deacon. And so let the
shepherd give thanks. But the bread is offered for a type of
My body. Let the cup be mixed with wine-—mixed with
wine and water, for it is a sign? of blood and of the laver?;
so that also the inner man, that is to say, that which is of
the soul, may be counted worthy of those things which are
like [them],* that is to say,> those things of the body also.
And ® let all the people, according to what hath been said
before, receive with Amen of the Eucharist’ which is offered.
Let the deacons hover over [them], as hath before been
said.®

Let him who giveth [the sacrament] say: The Body of Jesus
Christ, the Holy Ghost, for the healing of soul and body.
And let him who receweth say: Amen.

He who spilleth ° of the cup gathereth up judgment to
himself. Similarly also he who seeth and is silent and doth
not reprove him, whoever he may be. Let those who take
the Offering be exhorted by the priests to be careful to do
good works, to love strangers," to labour in fasting, and in
every good work to engage” in servitude. And let them be
taught also about the resurrection of the body *; before any
one receiveth baptism let no one know the? word about the
[page 148]
resurrection, for this is the new decree, which hath a new
name that none knoweth but he who receiveth [it].

The deacon doth not give the Offering to a presbyter.
Let him open the disc! or paten,? and let the presbyter
receive.

Let the deacon give [the Eucharist] to the people in their
hands. Let * the deacon, when the presbyter is not present,
of necessity baptize.

CHAPTER 11

If any one receive any service® to carry to a widow or
poor woman or any one constantly engaged in a Church work,
let him give it® the same day; and if not, on the morrow,
let him add something to it® from his own [property] and so
give it. For the bread of the poor hath been kept back in
his possession.

But in the last week of Pascha, on the fifth day of the
week, let the bread and the cup be offered. And he who
suffered for that which he hath offered, he [it is] who draweth
near.

Let the lamp be offered’ in the temple by the deacon,
saying ®: The grace of our® Lord [be] with you all. And let
all the people say: And with Thy spirit. And let the little
boys say spiritual psalms and hymns of praise by the light
of the lamp.’° Let all the people respond Hallelujah to the
psalm and to the chant sung together, with one accord, with
voices in harmony; and let no one kneel until he who
speaketh cease. Similarly also when a lection is read or the
word of doctrine is spoken. If then the Name of the Lord
1 rlvaé transliterated.

2 KPPTA, an unusual word.

3 Lit.: in his hand (‘‘people” being masculine and singular), Or: with
his [the deacon’s] hand. But this hardly makes sense.

4B. omits from here to ‘‘ possession ” in II. 11.

5 Or: administration (fem.). 6 Masc. (error).

7 Or: brought near, 8 B.: and let him say.

°B.: the.

0 Sic. Lit.: by (or close to) the burning of the lamp; or: the flame of the
lamp.

9
[page 149]
be spoken, and the rest, as hath sufficiently been made known,
let no one bow, having come creeping in.!

CHAPTER 12

Let the end? of Pascha be after the Saturday, at mid-
night.

[At] Pentecost let no one fast or kneel. For these are
days of rest and joy.

Let those who bear the burdens of labour refresh? them-
selves a little in the days of Pentecost, and on every first day
of the week.

Let the bishop, before he offereth the Offering,* say what
is fitting for the Offering, while those who are clothed in
white receive from one another and say [to one another]
Hallelujah.

CHAPTER 13

(THE AGAPE]

In the supper or feast, let those who have come together ®
receive [a portion ?] thus from the shepherd, as for a blessing.
But let not a catechumen receive.

If any one be of the household of, or related to, one who
is a teacher of heathenism,’ let him not accord with® him and
give praise with him, also let him not eat with him because
of relationship or for concord, lest he deliver ineffable things
to a wolf ® and he receive judgment.

Let those who are called with the bishop to the house of
one who is faithful, eat with gravity and knowledge, not with
drunkenness or to debauchery,!® and not so that he who is
present may laugh, or so as to annoy the household" of him
‘Meaning? Perhaps private devotions forbidden during public service.
[page 150]
that called him; but so let them enter that he who called
[them] may pray that the saints may enter into his house,
For ye are the salt of the earth,) [as] ye have heard.

Because? when they eat, let them eat abundantly, [but]
so that there may be left over both for you [and] also for
those to whom he that called you wisheth [to] send, so that
he may have them? as foods‘ left over® by the saints, and
that he may rejoice at that which remaineth over.

Let ® those who come to a feast, being called, not stretch
out” a hand before them that are elder. But let the last
eat ® when ® the first shall have done.

Let not those who eat strive !° in speech, but let them eat
in silence; but if any one desire, or the bishop or presbyter
ask [a question], let him return answer.

But when the bishop saith a word," let every one quietly,
praising [him], choose silence for himself, until he also ™ be
asked [a question].

CHAPTER 14 14

[FIRST FRUITS]

If any one bring forward * fruits or the first produce of
crops as first fruits, let him offer [them] to the bishop.1®

CHAPTER 1517

(PROPERTY |

If any one depart from the world, either a faithful man
or a faithful woman, having children, let them give their
1St. Matt. v. 18. 2 Sic, text.

3 Masc. The text is ungrammatical. 4 Fem.

5 Mase. ® Here S. resumes. 7Lit.: throw.

8 Or: let them eat last. » Lit.: and.

0 §.: be offended. Or: speaketh the word.
2 Or: giving praise. 13M. omits: also.

14 This chapter is‘also in 8. % Or: present ; lit.: make.
16 So punctuated. Perhaps ‘‘let him offer [them] as first fruits to the
bishop.” Lagarde thus punctuates, perhaps rightly : ef 71s kaprods . . . motel,
Tas dwapyas mpoodepérw TH éemioKbTry.

1 This chapter is also in 8.
[page 151]
possessions to the Church, so that the Church may provide
for their children, and [that] from the things which they
have the poor may be given rest, that God may give mercy
to their children and rest to those who have left [them] be-
hind. But if a man? have no children, let him have not
much possessions, but let him give much of his possessions
to the poor and to the prisoners? and only keep* what is
right and sufficient for him[self]. If a man? have children,’
and he desire to discipline himself in virginity, let him give
all his possessions to the poor, and discipline himself * and
abide in the church, being constant in prayers and thanks-
givings.’

CHAPTER 16

[FIRST FRUITS]

The fruits which are offered ® to the bishop let him bless
thus:

O God, we give thanks to Thee alway, and also in this
day when we offer to Thee the first fruits of the fruits which
Thou hast given us for food, having ripened® them by Thy
power and by Thy Word, having commanded from the
beginning of the creation’? of the worlds that the earth
should bring forth different fruits for the joy and delight of
man? and of all beasts.2 We praise Thee, O Lord, for all
these things with which Thou hast benefited us, adorning for
us all the earth with various fruits. Bless also this Thy servant
N., and receive his earnestness and his love, through Thine
Only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, through whom [be] praise
and honour and might to Thee with the Holy Ghost for ever
and ever. Amen.
[page 152]

Vegetables are not blessed, but fruits of trees, flowers,
and the rose and the lily.

CHarTer 17

OF ALL THE FAITHFUL WHO RECEIVE AND EAT

Let them give and return thanks and not eat with
offence or scandal. Let no one taste that which is strangled
or sacrificed to idols.”

CHAPTER 18

[PASCHAL SOLEMNITIES]

On the days of Pascha, especially in the last days, on
Friday and on Saturday, by night and by day, let the prayers
be according to the number of the hymns of praise. But let
the word be interpreted at length,? and let the lections [be]
various and continuous. And let the vigils and anticipations
of the night be in good order.®

CHAPTER 19
OF THE DEACONS WHO GO AND PASS AMONG WOMEN, LEST
THERE BE DISORDERLY YOUNG CHILDREN °

Let the readers assist them. Similarly also the sub-
deacons. Let them not allow them to sleep.’ For that
night is a figure of the kingdom, and especially that of the
Saturday.

Those who labour and work, let them work § till midnight.
Let the catechumens first be dismissed, having received
blessings ® from the bread which is broken.
1B.: flower. 2 Of. Acts xv. 29. 3 Lit.: thick ; or: well filled.
4 Lit.: dense. » evorabys translated. 8 Lit.: babes (see p. 178).
7 Lit.: nod. 8M.: weep.
5 evAoyla translated ; B.: a blessing.
[page 153]
When the faithful are dismissed, let them go in order’

and knowledge to their houses. In their feasts? let them not

forget the prayers.
Let the priests not abbreviate their ministrations.
Let the women go, each one cleaving to her husband.
Let the widows stay till dawn in the temple, having food

there.
Let the virgins? abide together in the temple, and let the

bishop help and provide for them, and let the deacons minister

to them.*
Let the presbyteresses stay with the bishop till dawn,

praying and resting.
Similarly also those who were lately baptized.
Let virgins? who are ready for marriage go, cleaving to

their mothers. This is thus fitting.

CHAPTER 205
Let the bishop command that they proclaim ® that no one

taste anything until the Offering is completed. And the whole

body of the Church shall receive a new food. Then in the

evening” let those who are to be® baptized be baptized, after

one lection.
But if any one before he approacheth and receiveth of

the Eucharist ® eat something else, he sinneth and his fast is

not reckoned to him.
When the catechumens are dismissed, let a hand be laid

on them.
If a faithful because of sickness remain [away], let the
deacon carry the Offering to him.
If any one be a presbyter who cannot come, let a presbyter
carry [it] to him.
Similarly if a woman be pregnant [and] sick, and cannot
fast these two days, let her fast that ?° one day," taking on the
[page 154]
first [day] bread and water. And if she cannot come, let a
deaconess carry [the Offering] to her.

CHAPTER 21 !

OF THOSE WHO ARE SICK

Let them take [it] up to the hearing of the bishop, so that
if it seem good? to the bishop he may visit them; for the
sick [man] is much comforted when the high priest re-
membereth him, and 3 especially when he is faithful.‘

CHAPTER 22

[THE PSALMS]

In answer to him who singeth the psalms in the church, -
let the virgins® and boys respond and sing. But if they sing
the psalms in a house privately, if they be two or three, let
them respond to one another, singing the psalms. Similarly
the men.

CHAPTER 23

[BURIALS]

If a poor man die, let those who provide for each one,
provide for his clothing. If any one who is a stranger die and
he have no place to be buried, let those who havea place give
[it]. But if the Church hath [a place] let it give [it], And
if he have no covering, let the Church similarly give it. But
if he have not grave clothes, let him be shrouded.

But if a man be found to have possessions, and do not
leave them to the Church, let them be kept for.a time; and
after a year let not the Church appropriate them, but let
them be given to the poor for his soul.

But if he desire ® to be embalmed, let the deacons provide
for this, a presbyter standing by.
[page 155]

If the Church have a graveyard, and there be one who
abideth there and keepeth it, let the bishop provide for him
from the Church, so that he be no burden to those who come
there.

CHAPTER 24

[HOURS OF PRAYER]

Let the people alway take care about the early dawn, that
arising and washing their hands they immediately pray. And
so let each one go to the work which he willeth.

Let all take care to pray at the third hour with mourning
and labour, either in the church, or in the house because they
cannot go (to the church). For this is the hour of the fixing +
of the Only-begotten on the cross.

But at the sixth hour similarly let there be prayer with
sorrow. For then the daylight was divided by the darkness.
Let there be then that voice which is like to the prophets,
and to creation mourning.

At the ninth hour also let prayer be protracted, as with
a hymn of praise that is like to the souls of those who give
praise to God that lieth not, as one who hath remembered His
saints, and hath sent His Word and Wisdom to enlighten
them. For in that hour life was opened to the faithful, and
blood and water were shed from the side of our Lord.

But at evening, when it is the beginning of another day,
shewing an image of the resurrection, He hath caused us to
give praise.

But at midnight let them arise praising? and lauding?
because of the resurrection.

But at dawn [let them arise] praising * with psalms, because
after He rose He glorified the Father while they ‘ were singing
psalms. But if any have a consort ® or wife [not] faithful,
[page 156]
let the husband who is faithful go and pray at these times
without fail.!

Let those who are chaste not lessen [them]. For the
adornments of heaven give praise, the lights, the sun, the
moon, the stars, the lightnings, the thunders, the clouds, the
angels, the archangels, the glories, the dominions, the whole
[heavenly] army, the depths, the sea, the rivers, the wells,
fire, dew, and all nature that produceth rain.

All the saints also give praise and all the souls of the
righteous.2 These, then,? who pray are numbered together in
the remembrance of God.

CHAPTER 25

[CONCLUSION]

When ye the faithful accomplish these things, teach and
instruct one another, causing the catechumens to make pro-
gress, as loving all men‘; ye do not® perish, but will be in
Me and I will be among you.®

But alway let the faithful take care that before he eat he
partake of the Eucharist,’ that he may be incapable of receiv-
ing injury.

When ye teach these things and keep [them], ye shall be
saved, and evil heresy ® shall not prevail against you.

Lo, then, I have taught you now all [things] that ye
desire; and those things® which I have spoken with you [of]
from the beginning, and have taught and commanded you
before I should suffer, ye know.

CHAPTER 26

And thou ” especially John, and Andrew and Peter, even
now ye know all [the things] which I have spoken to you
[page 157]
while I am with you, as also that which [is] in this Testament,
in order that when ye deliver [them] to the nations the will
of My Father may alway be accomplished, abiding’ firm in
carefulness, so that there may be good fruits in them that
hear.

Ye know that I have spoken with you that a good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit.2 All [things], then, that I have
commanded you openly and secretly, do. And the God of
tranquillity be with you.’

CHAPTER 27

And falling down we worshipped Him, saying, Glory to
Thee, O Jesus, Name of light, who didst give us the teaching
of Thy commandments, so that we may be like unto Thee,
we and all those who hear Thee. And when He spoke to us
and taught and commanded us, and showed many loosings®
and miracles, He was taken up from us, giving us tranquillity.®
John and Peter and Matthew wrote this Testament, and
sent [it] in copies from Jerusalem by Dositheus’? and Silas
and Magnus and Aquila, whom they chose to send [them] to
all dioceses. Amen.

The Second Book of Clement is ended, translated from the
Greek to the Syrian language by James the poor, in the year
998 of the Greeks.
